

=== PAGE 1 ===

METHODOLOGY PAPER
Co-design with Integrated 
Care Teams: Establishing 
Information Needs
P.J. WHITE 
BRIAN P. CASEY 
OLGA CLEARY 
EMER FINN
KATE O’CONNOR
NEVILLE COEN
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Co-design has been cited as playing a major role in the future of effective 
integrated care, however, there is a lack of reporting and reflection on the methods 
used. Information sharing is fundamental when working in integrated care, however 
sharing across professions, service settings and localities can be complex. Through 
co-design, we seek to establish a shared understanding of information needs within 
a newly formed integrated care team. In doing so we aim to inform future practice in 
the understanding of co-design.
Description: Co-design Workshop 1 (N = 24 participants, plus 6 facilitators), collected 
‘Current Position’ understanding of service information needs. Co-design Workshop 
2 (N = 18 participants, plus 6 facilitators) sought a ‘Future Position’ understanding, 
identifying solutions and next steps for establishing information-need solutions. 
Reflection on the co-design process was conducted to inform future co-design 
practices.
Conclusion: Identified was a wide range of future service information needs under the 
themes of Culture Building, Health System Needs, and Processes. We conclude with 4 
key learning points on co-designing. 1. Ensure simplicity in format. 2. Interdisciplinary 
co-design and co-facilitation of workshops are beneficial. 3. Planning and preparation 
are key. 4. Co-designing can enhance communication for service improvement.
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR:
P.J. White
Senior Lecturer, Research 
Director, designCORE, 
Humanities, South East 
Technological University, 
Carlow, Ireland
pj.white@setu.ie
KEYWORDS:
integrated care; co-
design; information needs; 
information; communication; 
integrated working
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
White PJ, Casey BP, Cleary O, 
Finn E, O’Connor K, Coen N. 
Co-design with Integrated Care 
Teams: Establishing Information 
Needs. International Journal 
of Integrated Care, 2023; 
23(4): 7, 1–14. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.5334/ijic.7618
*Author affiliations can be found in the back matter of this article


=== PAGE 2 ===

2
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
INTRODUCTION
Information sharing is fundamental when working in 
integrated care, however sharing across professions, 
service settings and localities can be complex. Co-design 
methods have been cited as playing a major role in the 
future of effective integrated care, however, there is a 
lack of reporting and reflection on the methods used. To 
support a newly formed community integrated care team 
in their shared goal of integrated care, we seek to establish 
a shared understanding of information needs through co-
design. To inform future methods and practice, we report 
and reflect on the process. In doing so we aim to inform 
future practice in the understanding of co-design.
BACKGROUND CONTEXT
The ‘Sláintecare’ programme was established in 2017 
to transform Irish health and social care services and 
to create a universal single-tier system [1]. Sláintecare’s 
quadruple aim is to improve patient/service user 
experience, improve clinician experience, lower costs 
and achieve better outcomes [2]. In achieving these 
aims, there is a need to re-orientate the model of care 
towards integrated and community care [2]. Improving 
clinician experience in integrated and community care 
requires a deep understanding of stakeholder needs 
for effective service change to optimise healthcare 
system performance and enhance patient/service user 
experience and outcomes.
Published in 2014, the ‘Community Healthcare 
Organisations – Report and Recommendations of the 
Integrated Service Area Review Group’ sets out a blueprint 
for how the Health Service Executive (HSE) primary and 
social care services will be organised and managed in the 
community [3]. Community Healthcare Networks (CHNs) 
are a foundational step in building a better health service.
Community care structures are now established, 
including 96 Community Healthcare Networks (CHN) 
aligned to 9 Community Healthcare Organisations. Each 
CHN operates across an average population of 50,000 
with between 4–6 multi-disciplinary care teams working 
together to deliver the Sláintecare vision of providing 
the right care, in the right place at the right time. CHNs 
will enable healthcare decisions to be made closer to 
the point of care, and specific to population needs with 
an emphasis on coordination and integration between 
community services and between community and 
acute service [4–6]. The goal is also to develop strong 
relationships with local communities and tailor service 
delivery to suit the needs of the population.
An integral part of integrated care is that professionals 
from different disciplines and services work together to 
provide high-quality care, this requires a high degree 
of information exchange about and with patients [7]. 
As CHNs are established, a key challenge is developing 
mechanisms to support information-driven healthcare 
within the limitations of clinical and health and social 
care information systems.
THE NEED
Team 
engagement 
and 
information 
sharing 
are 
fundamental aspects of integrated care working. Major 
efforts have been made to move healthcare services from 
silos of institutional-type care into community settings. 
However, despite progress services remain fragmented 
and in many cases, access to information is limited with 
data systems and infrastructure underdeveloped and 
team working weak [8].
In the Irish health service, Health and Social Care 
Professionals (HSCPs) are the second largest clinical group 
representing 25% of the clinical workforce and 14% of the 
overall health service workforce [9]. To promote integrated 
working, HSCPs may need to change the way they work, 
strengthen the delivery of ‘end-to-end’ care and enable 
the closing of linkages between primary and secondary 
care [10]. For HSCPs to promote integrated working and to 
improve service user outcomes, effective and appropriate 
communication is a specific competency [11]. There is 
a need then for HSCPs to have relevant filtered, focused 
and accessible information available to support effective 
patient care directly and across their team. Efficient 
information sharing has the potential to mitigate adverse 
impacts of excessive administrative burden on clinicians in 
favour of clinical care [12]. Several initiatives are underway 
to address these challenges in community healthcare 
nationally, which will require translation into more local 
integrated care contexts. Establishing an understanding 
of HSCPs information needs for integrated care work is 
required in the first instance.
BENEFITS AND NEED FOR CO-DESIGN IN 
HEALTHCARE AND INTEGRATED CARE
Integrated care is adaptive to suit the needs of the 
service users, therefore there is a need to understand 
specific local contexts, values and preferences [13]. As we 
prepare for structural change in our health services, HSCPs 
responsible for the delivery of community healthcare 
services in CHNs must contribute to shaping the future of 
care in our community. The most successful international 
integrated care programmes have adopted a bottom-
up person-centred approach involving service users and 
clinicians [14]. Co-design has been identified by the HSE as 
a crucial methodology to achieve this, with a key reform 
theme being to: “…work in partnership with service users, 
to co-design new ways of improving the experience of 
care, and support staff in the delivery of services” [15].
Co-design is now used as a key method in healthcare 
reform. According to Ní Shé & Harrison, co-design in 
healthcare is the process of bringing together service 
users, clinical and non-clinical staff, and relevant groups 
to work together to improve services [16]. It involves 
the equal partnership of individuals who work within 


=== PAGE 3 ===

3
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
the system and individuals who have lived experience 
of using it [17]. Co-design is intended to be meaningful 
engagement; occurring across all stages (of project 
work), and it can range in intensity from passive to high 
involvement [18].
When discussing co-design, it is important to note 
definitions from a design practitioner’s viewpoint. For 
example, Sanders and Stappers describe co-design as 
the “creativity of designers and people not trained in 
design working together in the design development 
process” [19] This definition points to the important role 
of trained designers to inform the process and ensure 
that designing is central to the process.
According to Moll et al., the co-design process seeks to 
“tap into tacit knowledge, creativity and shared meaning 
of diverse perspectives to co-create a shared vision for 
improvement” [20].
The distinguishing feature of co-design processes led 
by designers is the involvement of forms of ‘making’ 
in a practice based manner e.g. prototyping. These 
allow participants to explore, share and test a vision 
of improvement with others [21]. Roberts et al, states 
that “…the application of design approaches within 
healthcare help drive necessary innovation in care 
delivery models [22] p. 4. Furthermore, leveraging the 
knowledge, experiences, and insights of end-users is 
proven to achieve impactful innovations, benefiting 
researchers, practitioners, processes, and research 
outcomes [18, 23]. Wolstenholme, Grindell and Dearden 
state that co-design can lead to healthcare teams 
exhibiting characteristics that support innovation in 
the long term [24]. When used to improve healthcare 
systems, Langley, Wolstenholme and Cooke, report 
that it creates the right conditions for knowledge to be 
mobilised and activated [21], helping to make sure that 
improvements are useful and relevant [23]. Co-designing 
is advantageous when working with teams as it leads to 
more long-term success, more support and enthusiasm 
for change, and can generate solutions that improve 
day-to-day experiences [25, 26].
Co-design methods and processes have been 
cited as playing a major role in the future of effective 
integrated care. However, a knowledge gap lies in the 
underdevelopment of co-design processes in health 
care and HSCPs involvement in this. This knowledge gap 
is a result of a lack of reporting and reflection on using 
methods in the field. Ward et al. state that although 
co-design has great potential as a methodology for 
understanding healthcare; there is a gap in the peer-
reviewed literature on ‘how to do’ co-design in practice 
[17]. Noting the need for a co-design approach in 
healthcare, Wolstenholme, Grindell and Dearden, state 
that further exploration of the use of design in service 
improvement is required [24]. At a national level, there 
is a need for HSCPs to co-design the planning of services 
across all aspects of health service delivery [9].
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
Due to the needs and knowledge gap outlined above, 
the aim of this paper is to inform future practice in the 
understanding of the development, use and facilitation 
of co-design with integrated care teams.
The specific objectives of the paper are to:
1.	 Report on co-design development
	
Report on the development, use, and facilitation 
of co-design methods with an integrated care 
team. In doing this we seek to establish a shared 
understanding of integrated care service information 
needs to support good practice and quality 
improvement at Community Health Network level.
2.	 Reflect on the experience of co-designing.
	
Offer a reflection on co-designing used within integrated 
care to inform the ‘how to do’ of future practice. In this 
paper, we reflect on the use of co-design within a newly 
formed integrated care team seeking to improve health 
service provision in the community.
METHODOLOGY
To meet the aim and objectives, co-design methods were 
developed and used over 2 co-design workshops to support 
service understanding of information needs for clinicians, 
HSCPs and health service management operational in 
a newly formed Community Healthcare Network. The 
identified participants were interdisciplinary, consisting 
of Occupational Therapy, Physiotherapy, Speech and 
Language and Dietetics as well as engagement with 
Public Health Nursing, General Practice, Health and Well-
being and Primary Care Management (Workshop 1: N = 
24 and Workshop 2: N = 18). The facilitation team (N = 6) 
was also interdisciplinary, consisting of two experienced 
co-design facilitators from Product Design and Design 
Engineering disciplines, two HSCPs and two healthcare 
managers, including the CHN manager. The facilitation 
team designed, planned and prepared the structure 
and original content for the workshops purposefully to 
tailor directly to the needs of the HSCPs. The co-design 
workshops were conducted and facilitated in person in 
keeping with COVID-19 guidelines. Overview of Co-design 
stages are shown in Figure 1.
For co-designing, a design-led qualitative interpretivist 
approach was taken to engage with stakeholders and 
a grounded theory approach to analysis. Interpretivist 
approaches were used to ensure shared understandings 
and meanings with participants [27]. Due to the inclusive 
nature of its process [28], participant-led co-design through 
a practice-based approach was the core methodology 
used. This ensured that stakeholders designed from not 
only their point of view but also shared and drew from 
the experiences of others, guaranteeing that a deep, 
empathic, and unbiased understanding is gained.


=== PAGE 4 ===

4
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
Reflections on the experiences of co-designing were 
conducted by and were from the design and facilitation 
team using the Gibbs reflective cycle. In this, the 
facilitation team engaged in collaborative reflection 
sessions where they shared their observations and 
insights. This occurred after each workshop. Describing 
and evaluating the positive and negative feelings and 
thoughts of the experience, analysing to make sense of 
the situation and conclusion about what was learned and 
what you could have done differently for the future [29].
The HSE National Framework for the Governance, 
Management and Support of Health Research (RGMS 
Framework) outlines the necessary guidelines for the 
proper governance and management of research within 
healthcare services and applies to all health research 
hosted by HSE or HSE-funded services. After consulting 
with the national HSE Research and Development 
Office, guidance was given that as this was a service 
quality improvement initiative with a focus on co-design 
methodology, it was deemed to fall outside the scope 
of the HSE RGMS Framework. Quality improvement falls 
under section 4.1.4 Activities that do not require Research 
Ethics Committee (REC) approval [30].
There was no obligation for participation but those 
who had an interest in service improvement and the 
capacity/availability to attend were encouraged, no 
incentives were offered to participate. Participation was 
encouraged by the Network Management and supported 
by senior health services management as part of a 
service improvement approach. Permission to leave their 
clinical role was granted for the workshop. Participants 
weren’t required to complete any pre-work or post-work 
between events.
Awareness of any potential power dynamics between 
disciplines and participants was important when 
facilitating the co-design workshops. This was facilitated 
by being conscience of equal time and voice of each 
participant in each group when possible. The design and 
facilitation team set out the objectives of the workshop 
in an introductory presentation at both events and 
highlighted the importance of everyone’s contribution 
across disciplines and the need to ensure there was 
a focus on understanding the information needs of all 
representatives to move towards an integrated team 
approach in the Network. Participants did not record their 
names on their ideas during the co-design activities, 
reinforcing the message that all ideas were equally 
valued regardless of seniority or discipline. In addition, 
more junior HSCP representatives as well as discipline 
managers were purposely recruited to capture diverse 
information needs thereby ensuring a balanced input 
from staff grades.
LIMITATIONS
Limitations 
include 
the 
underrepresentation 
of 
some HSCPs across workshops as not all HSCPs were 
represented at both, this was due primarily to the 
difficulty in obtaining a workshop time and location that 
worked for all disciplines. All disciplines were requested 
including Public Health Nurses and Psychology who 
work within the Network but are not part of the line 
management process. Psychology could not attend due 
to staff shortages. A representative sample was present 
at both workshops, including representation from all 
disciplines in the CHN. COVID restrictions meant that the 
sample size was smaller than originally envisaged as 
Figure 1 Co-design stages.


=== PAGE 5 ===

5
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
workshop attendance had to be maintained at certain 
numbers to allow for adequate social distancing. Time 
constraints meant both workshops were limited to a 
half-day commitment. The focus of the initiative meant 
that only staff operating within the CHN were included in 
the workshops and gaps remain in the knowledge base 
for information needs for integrated working beyond the 
Network with the wider health system.
Due to funding obligations, project scope, and 
constraints, the primary focus for these workshops was to 
establish information needs within integrated care teams 
e.g., clinical and HSCP staff. Co-design workshops of this 
nature are a new approach to HSE service improvement, 
therefore require incremental development, support, 
and future funding to progress. Acknowledging that 
they are key to success, future co-design workshops will 
be planned to include patient and service users. These 
future workshops will open out divergent questions on 
information needs ensuring equality and diversity of 
participant’s voices.
SAMPLE PARTICIPANTS
The process employed a non-probability purposeful 
sampling approach, this was appropriate for exploratory 
enquiry to develop an understanding of the needs of HSE 
clinicians in the CHN which is a small defined population 
of clinical and HSCP staff. In a targeted approach, the 
design and facilitation team (N = 6) used their expertise 
to draw from the total sample of clinicians to identify a 
sample most useful to deliver on the outcomes of the 
study. This is a commonly applied and useful approach in 
health services sampling.
Sampling criteria included representation from all 
disciplines in the CHN. It also included representation 
from management and staff grades to ensure a wide 
range of experiences and ideas informed the enquiry. 
The sampling frame is the total number of clinicians and 
managers in employment in the Network. Recruitment 
was by email, and the initiative was supported by the 
Network’s Communications Working Group. Participants 
were encouraged to attend both events at the outset 
and again encouraged to attend workshop 2 at the end 
of workshop 1.
An extended group of participants were considered 
for inclusion in the study in line with integrated service 
provision including Public Health Nurses, GPs, practice 
nursing and pharmacy as well other extended support 
service providers in the community. There was no 
obligation for participation but those who had an interest 
in service improvement and the capacity/availability to 
attend were welcomed. The final sample of participants 
was identified across disciplines as outlined in Table 1. 
We achieved a high representation of the various relevant 
stakeholders across the sample we were seeking. Clinical 
staff were a mix of Staff Grade, Senior Grade and HSCP 
Discipline Management.
CO-DESIGN WORKSHOP 1: UNDERSTANDING 
USER NEED
Overview
Co-Design Workshop 1 sought to collect current position 
understanding and highlight gaps in system knowledge 
and service information needs. The objectives were to:
1.	 Define parameters of information needs for 
integrated care working in Community Health 
Networks
2.	 Establish a shared understanding of information on 
current position needs among participants
3.	 Map existing information flows as ‘current position’ 
based on patient personas and identify pinch points 
in system knowledge and integrated information 
exchange.
The co-design activity was conducted in an active 
workshop-style setting. A large hotel function area was 
hired with moveable furniture to allow for flexibility and 
movement, and large wall spaces to visualise and share 
ongoing work. This workshop was facilitated in person 
by the design and facilitation team. Table 2 outlines the 
agenda for Workshop 1.
DISCIPLINE
WORKSHOP 1
WORKSHOP 2
Occupational Therapy
4
2
Physiotherapy
3
2
Speech and Language
2
2
Dietetics
4
2
Health and Wellbeing
2
2
Public Health Nurse
2
2
General Practitioner Lead
1
1
General Practitioners in the CHN
2
1
HSE Management, Staff and 
Administration
4
4
Total
24
18
Table 1 Workshop representation of the two workshops.
INFORMATION NEEDS FOR INTEGRATED WORKING – 
WORKSHOP 1 AGENDA
8:30
Tea/coffee, networking
9:00
Welcome and introduction
9:15
Part 1: Information needs for integrated working – 
What do we need to know?
10:00
Coffee break
10:15
Part 2: Information needs for integrated working – 
Identifying the challenges and opportunities.
11:00
Capturing the learning and key themes identified
11:20
Wrap up and close
Table 2 Agenda Workshop 1.


=== PAGE 6 ===

6
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
Workshop 1 Format
A welcome and introduction presentation formally 
commenced the workshop. Outlined in the introduction 
was the importance of the co-design approach 
advocating that participant input was essential to the 
development of new ways of working in the Network.
For the workshop, participants were grouped into 6 
breakout groups of 4 participants, guided by one of the 
6 facilitators. As this work was conducted during the 
COVID 19 period, services couldn’t release equal staff 
representatives from each discipline for workshops. 
Understanding that an equal distribution of disciplines 
was not possible across all 6 groups, the design and 
facilitation team selected groups to ensure the optimum 
diversity of the interdisciplinary range of healthcare 
providers. The workshop was designed to be participant-
led, in doing so being open and discursive [28], collecting 
as many views, experiences, and narratives of services as 
possible, and building on and exploring the experiences 
of others. Through a series of open-ended questions, 
participants were asked to discuss their experiences 
of the current position in healthcare services. Poster 
templates were designed and printed in A1 format 
to facilitate the capture of experiences (Figure 2). As 
experiences were shared, they were written on sticky 
notes and displayed on the posters in a process of 
affinity diagramming. Affinity diagramming is a method 
used in User Experience Design to organise large sets of 
ideas into clusters, commonly used to sort design ideas 
in group workshop settings [31]. A blank poster template 
labelled ‘Backlog Items’ was available to each group to 
display any discussed item that didn’t fit into a theme or 
issues that were worth noting but could prevent the flow 
of topic discussion. In the planning stage of the workshop, 
prototyping of workshop assets and ‘trial runs’ of the 
process occurred. Iterative revision was implemented to 
anticipate and mitigate potential adverse responses.
Co-design Workshop 1 Part 1
Part 1 of the workshop was guided by the following 
questions to understand the current position needs:
Initial Warm-up Brainstorm question: What does 
working well in an integrated way mean to me?
Figure 2 Workshop 1 Part 1 blank ‘Current Position Needs Finding’ poster template and example of poster template in the process of 
affinity diagramming.


=== PAGE 7 ===

7
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
This was divided into the sub-questions:
 
• What is ‘Working Well’?
 
• What is Integrated working?
 
• What are my immediate information needs?
Main Question 1: Information that other 
healthcare colleagues/disciplines/services need 
to know about my service to work well in an 
integrated way in Network 3?
Main Question 2: Information that my service 
needs to know about other services to work well 
and deliver integrated care in the Network?
Participants were asked to think about these information 
needs from three different perspectives:
• As an integrated team in your Network
• With other HSE colleagues
• With the wider community
Co-design Workshop 1 Part 2: Personas and Needs
Part 2 of the workshop involved identifying the 
challenges and opportunities in information needs for 
integrated working. To facilitate participants, 3 personas 
with different health and social care needs were created. 
(Figures 3, 4, 5). These personas were pre-defined and 
piloted with a sub-group of HSCPs before use in the 
workshop. Personas are representative “characters” 
of end-users, made up of multiple people offering a 
synthesised representation of a population [32].
The following tasks were assigned to the breakout 
groups:
Task 1: select the persona the group feels they can 
best discuss
Task 2: individually consider:
	
•	 all care requirements for the patient
	
•	 all information you need on the patient to deliver 
the best care possible
Task 3: As a group discuss all the information 
needs you have to deliver care for the patient in 
the Network
Task 4: As a group identify any challenges you 
have to get the right information for this patient
Task 5: As a group identify any opportunities you 
see for increasing information flow across and 
between disciplines to deliver high-quality care to 
this patient.
As with Part 1 of the workshop, as experiences were 
shared, they were written on sticky notes and displayed 
on the ‘Persona Needs Finding template’ (Figure 6) in a 
process of affinity diagramming.
Interim analysis phase
An interim analysis phase was conducted by the design 
and facilitation team to organise identified themes 
and formulate a current position understanding from 
workshop 1. Workshop data were analysed through a 
grounded theory approach. This was a process of data 
management and coding [33]. Firstly, data management 
involved ‘cleaning’ [34] or organising the data and 
transcription (of all sticky notes on posters). This process 
was commenced during the workshop where data was 
Figure 3 Persona 1. Marty.


=== PAGE 8 ===

8
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
organised with participants into broad themes. A deeper 
thematic analysis and synthesis occurred post-workshop 
through the coding of all sticky notes on posters. Coding 
is the “sensemaking” stage where analytic questions 
will be asked of the data, categorising segments with a 
short name (a code) and using these codes to develop 
a deep understanding of what is happening [35, 36]. A 
combination of manual coding with the CAQDAS software 
NVivo™ was used to code the data. Approx. 450 sticky 
notes were coded into 50 themes in the first pass of 
coding. The second pass at coding synthesised these into 
3 main themes with 12 sub-themes. Analysis and themes 
from co-design workshops were initially reported back 
to participants in workshop 2, with complete workshop 
findings presented at HSPC group presentations. Analysis 
and identified themes were key outputs from workshop 1.
Co-Design Workshop 2: The Future Position
The objective of co-design workshop 2 was to envision 
and develop a ‘future position’ for improved information 
needs, to enable person-centred integrated care. The 
findings in Workshop 1 created a platform to build the 
Figure 5 Persona 3. Nicky.
Figure 4 Persona 2. Bernadette.


=== PAGE 9 ===

9
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
Workshop 2 agenda concentrating on moving into a 
solution-focused space with identified priorities and 
workable solutions for service development. The co-
design activity was conducted in an active workshop-
style setting, a large hotel function area was hired with 
moveable furniture to allow for flexibility and movement, 
and large wall spaces to visualise and share ongoing 
work. This was a half-day event, facilitated in person. 
Table 3. outlines the agenda for workshop 2. Similar 
to workshop 1, in the planning stage of the workshop, 
prototyping of workshop assets, ‘trial runs’ and iterative 
revision of the process occurred. Reflections and learning 
from the first workshop were implemented into the 
second workshop.
Workshop Format
The introduction again outlined the importance of the co-
design approach highlighting that participant input was 
essential to the development of new ways of working 
in the Network. Following the introduction, an overview 
of findings from workshop 1 was presented, serving as 
a reminder of the process and showing the range of 
responses. Analysis and themes of workshop 1 were 
then presented followed by an overview and objectives 
of workshop 2.
workshop 2 followed a similar format to Workshop 1. 
Participants (N = 18) were grouped into 3 breakout groups 
of 5 to 7 guided by one of the 6 facilitators. Groups were 
selected to ensure diversity in an interdisciplinary range 
of healthcare providers. The workshop was designed to 
be open and discursive; to collect as many insights, views, 
ideas, and narratives of services as possible, building on 
and exploring the ideas of others. As ideas were shared, 
they were written on sticky notes and displayed in a 
process of affinity diagramming. In contrast to Workshop 
1, one canvas was used to facilitate the entire workshop. 
This was in the format of a ‘Near, Mid and Far’ timeline 
canvas (outlined in Table 4).
INFORMATION NEEDS FOR INTEGRATED WORKING – 
WORKSHOP 2 AGENDA
8:45 am
Tea/coffee and networking.
9:15 am
Welcome, introductions and looking to the future
9:30 am
Workshop 1 – Overview of Findings
9:45 am
Analysis and Themes of Workshop 1
10:00 am
Breakout 1 – How will my working day be better in 
the Network?
10:30 am
Coffee break
10:50 am
Breakout 2 – Identifying solutions and next steps
12:00 pm
Closing remarks
12:15 pm
Lunch
Table 3 Agenda for Workshop 2.
Figure 6 Persona Needs Finding template (Blank: Left) with in-process affinity diagramming (Right).


=== PAGE 10 ===

10
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
Co-Design Workshop 2: Breakout 1
Breakout 1 was centred on the following question: How 
will my working day be better in the Network? Each 
group shared ideas based on “I would like to have” or “if I 
had” statements in relation to the following overarching 
themes that were identified within Workshop 1:
• Theme 1: Increased awareness of services within the 
Network.
• Theme 2: Integrated team working within and 
beyond the Network.
• Theme 3: Service developments and delivering on 
common goals in the Network.
Each group worked across the canvas envisioning the 
future position over periods: Near = 3–6 months, mid = 
1–2 years, Far = 3–5 years.
Co-Design Workshop 2 Breakout 2 – Identifying 
solutions and next steps  
Continuing with the canvas and the statements identified 
from breakout 1 group focused on 2 actions in breakout 
workshop 2. Groups were asked to identify challenges and 
to create solutions to these challenges led by the questions:
1.	 What are the challenges to implementation?
2.	 What are the potential solutions to those challenges?
Analysis of Workshop 2
The analysis of the outputs of workshop 2 was conducted 
through a process of manual coding (Figure 7) of the 
insights into organising themes and visual analysis and 
sense-making of the resultant insights and themes [37, 
38]. This was achieved with two facilitators coding the 
insights. To start the analysis, firstly, the insights gathered 
on the workshop canvas were grouped into observations, 
challenges, and solutions and these were spaced by 
timeframe from immediate and near-term through 
to perfect future position (long term). Notes carrying 
solutions were identified either by the colour of the note 
or a marking applied to the note by the participants in the 
workshop. With the solutions and insight viewed in this 
manner, organising structures were developed.
Identified from the first pass (independent observations) 
the following overarching observations were:
• The importance of building social connections 
within the workspace to facilitate enhanced 
communication.
NEAR (6–12 MONTHS)
MID (1–3 YEARS)
FAR (3 YEARS+)
Theme 1
Increased awareness of services in the Network (Who What 
Why Where and When)
Theme 2
Integrated Team working within and beyond the Network
Theme 3
Service Development and delivering on common goals
Table 4 Format for ‘Near, Mid and Far’ timeline canvas used in workshop 2.
Figure 7 Workshop 2 process of manual coding into themes on a whiteboard.


=== PAGE 11 ===

11
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
• The ongoing effectiveness of staff to be supported 
with attention to well-being and staff training.
• Information system needs and improvement of 
systems support in current needs.
• Importance of establishing common frames of 
reference.
• Requirement for clarity around organisational 
structures and potential to restructure around 
network delivery.
• Value and challenge around integrated team 
working.
Combining these independent insights resulted in the 
proposal of three key overarching but interconnected 
themes which served as information outputs from the 
workshops:
1.	 Culture
2.	 Systems (Information Systems)
3.	 Processes (organisational structures and workflows)
These themes including complete workshop findings 
were presented at HSPC group presentations and 
reported back to participants.
DISCUSSION: 4 KEY LEARNING POINTS 
ON CO-DESIGNING WITH INTEGRATED 
CARE TEAMS
A specific objective of this paper is to reflect on the 
experience of co-designing used within integrated care 
to inform the ‘how to do’ of future practice. The following 
is a reflection synthesised into 4 key points. This was 
conducted by the design and facilitation team using the 
Gibbs reflective cycle.
1.	 Preparation, Pre Planning and Planning for post-
workshop analysis are key
• Pre-planning and tailoring of workshops prior to 
running and implementation are most important. 
‘Trial runs’ of the process before workshops and 
prototyping of workshop assets to see how they 
may be interpreted by participants were key. In 
the planning stage, workshop assets, workflow, 
and timings should be revised to anticipate and 
mitigate potential adverse responses. This can help 
in mitigating potential challenges e.g., power and 
dynamics of participants, energy, and diversity of 
voice within participants.
• Plan and prepare to make the best use of time. 
Professionals with high workloads need to feel 
workshops are fully considered and that their time is 
respected and well spent.
• It is also important to allow for flexibility, iteration, 
and refinement as co-design workshops progress. 
Also, to allow for an improvement/learning cycle 
between workshops, in this instance, the second 
workshop was refined based on learning from the first.
• Plan for analysis and synthesis. This can be a labour-
intensive and time-consuming activity to ensure 
rigour, especially manual coding. Factor in sufficient 
time for this activity and resources when applying for 
funding to conduct co-design.
2.	 Ensure Simplicity in Format
	
The process of co-designing in groups benefits from 
being visual [39, 40] and designing simple inclusive 
formats with easy-to-interpret assets. From the 
perspective of facilitation, simplification of assets 
to record workshops e.g., the use of simplified 
posters and specifically created personas were key 
for engagement. This allows for time efficiency in 
facilitation and elicits quick and diverse inputs from 
participants.
3.	 Interdisciplinary Co-design and Co-facilitation of 
Workshops
• The design and facilitation team in this instance 
consisted of design practitioners together with 
subject matter experts, healthcare managers and 
clinicians. Having an interdisciplinary team offers 
benefits both in terms of designing appropriate 
workshops and assets and the ability for healthcare 
practitioners to replicate the activity for future 
studies, independent of the support of the design 
practitioners.
• Input of integrated care team managers is critical to 
ensure that findings from co-design processes are 
honoured and implemented where possible. This 
supports staff in their transitioning to new integrated 
team structures and allows an understanding of 
their value within the service they provide while 
simultaneously delivering on the quadruple aim of 
Sláintecare.
4.	 Co-designing can enhance communication for 
service improvement
• Facilitators felt that the co-design workshops helped 
in enhancing interdisciplinary communication. The 
act of getting a diversity of healthcare staff including 
HSCPs and their Public Health Nursing and GP 
colleagues in a room together to discuss integrated 
care was considered powerful and important in itself.
• The design and facilitation team felt that co-design 
in this instance provided a means for the workforce 
to identify and develop different ways of working 
together, to sustain this practice and improve. 
The workshops were seen to identify better ways 
of working to support integrated care, identifying 
a continuum of activities to build integrated care 
capacity.


=== PAGE 12 ===

12
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
CONCLUSION
This paper aimed to inform future practice in the 
understanding of the development, use and facilitation 
of co-design with integrated care teams. Conducted 
through a process of quality improvement, we sought 
to establish a shared understanding of information 
needs among a newly formed integrated care team. We 
developed and used co-design methods to understand 
the ‘current and future position’ of service information 
needs from the team perspective to support good 
practice in integrated care provision.
The workshops offered a wide range of service 
information needs. Culture Building, System Needs, 
and Processes were identified as key themes in future 
information needs for healthcare staff working in CHNs. 
Offering a reflection of methods used, we conclude with 4 
key learning points on co-designing with Integrated Care 
Teams. 1. Ensure simplicity in format. 2. Interdisciplinary 
co-design and co-facilitation of workshops are beneficial. 
3. Planning and preparation of workshops are key. Finally, 
4. From this work, we conclude that co-designing can 
enhance communication for service improvement.
Future co-design work will now be progressed to 
help develop these findings and evolve best practices in 
integrated care service improvement. This future work 
will focus on the information needs of both service staff 
and users ensuring equality and diversity of voice of all 
participants.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to acknowledge the National Health & Social 
Care Professions Office for supporting this initiative by 
awarding HSCP Research Seed Funding to the design and 
facilitation team. Particular thanks to Sinead Fitzpatrick, 
Development Manager in the National Health and Social 
Care Professions Office, for her ongoing support of this 
initiative throughout the Covid-19 pandemic.
A special thanks to all the CHN staff, Public Health 
Nurses and GP colleagues who attended the workshops 
and who gave so generously of their time and energies 
to focus on solutions to integrated working. We thank 
you for your cooperation and enthusiasm for embracing 
this process and your ongoing commitment to the 
development of integrated working in the Network and 
beyond.
REVIEWERS
Dr Justine Tomlinson, Mpharm PhD PGDip MFRPSI FHEA, 
Assistant Professor in Medical Education (Physician 
Associates), PGR Coordinator – School of Pharmacy and 
Medical Sciences.
Faculty of Life Sciences School of Pharmacy and 
Medical Sciences, University of Bradford, UK.
One anonymous reviewer.
FUNDING INFORMATION
This work was supported by National Health & Social 
Care Professions Office, through which the team were 
awarded HSCP Research Seed Funding.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors have no competing interests to declare.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
P.J. White 
 orcid.org/0000-0002-5716-8643 
Senior Lecturer, Research Director, designCORE, Humanities, 
South East Technological University, Carlow, Ireland
Brian P. Casey 
 orcid.org/0000-0002-5625-5171 
Head of Department, Humanities, South East Technological 
University, Carlow, Ireland
Olga Cleary 
 orcid.org/0000-0003-3623-8662 
Senior Research and Development Manager, HSE Research and 
Development, HSE. Contact details: 2nd Floor Jervis House, Jervis 
Street, Dublin 1, Ireland
Emer Finn 
Occupational Therapy HSE, Memory Technology Resource Room 
(MTRR) New Ross Healthy Living Centre, New Ross, Wexford 
Ireland, Y34 C821, Ireland
Kate O’Connor 
Primary Care Development Officer, Carlow, Kilkenny and South 
Tipperary, James Green Community Services, Kilkenny, Ireland
Neville Coen 
Operational Team Lead, Waterford Integrated Care for Older 
People (WICOP), Health Service Executive, St Patrick’s Way, 
Waterford, X91 XE86, Ireland
REFERENCES
1.	
Government of Ireland. Sláintecare Implementation 
Strategy & Action Plan 2021 — 2023. Dublin 
Ireland: Government of Ireland; 2021. [cited 2023 
29 July]. Available from: https://www.lenus.ie/
handle/10147/629409.
2.	
OCFH. Committee on the Future of Healthcare Sláintecare 
Report. Oireachtas Committee on the Future of 
Healthcare, Houses of the Oireachtas; 2017. [cited 
2023 30 July]. Available from: https://www.lenus.ie/
handle/10147/622734.
3.	
HSE. Community healthcare organisations – report and 
recommendations of the integrated service area review 


=== PAGE 13 ===

13
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
group. Health Service Executive (HSE); 2014. [cited 
2023 29 July]. Available from: https://www.lenus.ie/
handle/10147/332367.
4.	
HSE. Enhanced Community Care (ECC) programme – care 
closer to home: HSE; 2022 [cited 2023 30 July]. Available 
from: https://www.hse.ie/eng/services/list/2/primarycare/
enhanced-community-care/.
5.	
HSE. Community Healthcare Networks: HSE; 2021 [cited 
2023 02 Aug]. Available from: https://www.hse.ie/eng/
services/list/2/primarycare/community-healthcare-
networks/.
6.	
HSE. Community Healthcare Organisations Report & 
Recommendations of the Integrated Service Area Review 
Group: Frequently Asked Questions [cited 2023 30 
July]. Available from: https://www.theatnetwork.com/
wp-content/uploads/2015/07/FAQs-on-Community-
Healthcare-Organisations.pdf.
7.	
Denis P. Integrated Care Needs Integrated Information 
Management and Technology. Healthcare Quarterly. 2009; 
13(Sp): 24–9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.12927/hcq.2009.21093
8.	
Government of Ireland. Sláintecare Implementation 
Strategy and Next Steps. Dublin; 2018. [cited 2023 01 Aug]. 
Available from: https://www.drugsandalcohol.ie/29415/1/
Sl%C3%A1intecare-Implementation-Strategy.pdf.
9.	
HSE. A Strategic Guidance Framework for Health and Social 
Care Professions 2021–2026. Dublin; 2021. [cited 2023 
03 Aug]. Available from: https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/
who/cspd/health-and-social-care-professionals/hscp-day-
2022-web-resources/hscp-deliver-selected-extracts-.pdf.
10.	 HSE. Integrated Model of Care for the Prevention and 
Management of Chronic Disease. Dublin: Health Service 
Executive Ireland; 2021. [cited 2023 02 Aug]. Available 
from: https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/icp/
chronic-disease/documents/chronic-disease-service-
model-implementation-resource-pack.pdf.
11.	 HSCP. Draft HSCP Advanced Practice Framework. HSE 
National HSCP Office; 2022. [cited 2023 02 Aug]. 
Available from: https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/cspd/
health-and-social-care-professionals/final-draft-hscp-ap-
framework-for-consultation-dec-2022.pdf.
12.	 Erickson SM, Rockwern B, Koltov M, McLean RM. 
Putting Patients First by Reducing Administrative Tasks 
in Health Care: A Position Paper of the American College 
of Physicians. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2017; 166(9): 
659–61. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7326/M16-2697
13.	 World Health Organization. World report on ageing and 
health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. [cited 
2023 02 Aug]. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/186463.
14.	 World Health Organization. Integrated care for older 
people: realigning primary health care to respond to 
population ageing. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2018. Contract No.: WHO/HIS/SDS/2018.44. [cited 
2023 02 Aug]. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/326295.
15.	 HSE. South East Community Healthcare Operational 
Plan 2018. Health Service Executive (HSE); 2018. [cited 
2023 02 Aug]. Available from: https://www.lenus.ie/
handle/10147/623011.
16.	 Ní Shé É, Harrison R. Mitigating unintended consequences 
of co-design in health care. Health Expectations. 2021 Oct; 
24(5): 1551–6 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/hex.13308
17.	 Ward ME, De Brún A, Beirne D, Conway C, Cunningham 
U, English A, et al. Using Co-Design to Develop a Collective 
Leadership Intervention for Healthcare Teams to Improve 
Safety Culture. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health. 2018. Jun 5; 15(6): 1182. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15061182
18.	 Slattery P, Saeri AK, Bragge P. Research co-design in 
health: a rapid overview of reviews. Health Research Policy 
and Systems. 2020; 18(1): 17. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12961-020-0528-9
19.	 Sanders EBN, Stappers PJ. Co-creation and the new 
landscapes of design. CoDesign. 2008; 4(1): 5–18. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15710880701875068
20.	 Moll S, Wyndham-West M, Mulvale G, Park S, Buettgen 
A, Phoenix M, et al. Are you really doing ‘codesign’? Critical 
reflections when working with vulnerable populations. 
BMJ Open. 2020; 10(11): e038339. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmjopen-2020-038339
21.	 Langley J, Wolstenholme D, Cooke J. ‘Collective 
making’ as knowledge mobilisation: the contribution of 
participatory design in the co-creation of knowledge in 
healthcare. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018; 18(1): 585. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-018-3397-y
22.	 Roberts JP, Fisher TR, Trowbridge MJ, Bent C, (eds.). A 
design thinking framework for healthcare management 
and innovation. Healthcare; 2016: Elsevier. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.hjdsi.2015.12.002
23.	 Bird M, McGillion M, Chambers EM, Dix J, Fajardo CJ, 
Gilmour M, et al. A generative co-design framework for 
healthcare innovation: development and application of an 
end-user engagement framework. Research Involvement 
and Engagement. 2021; 7(1): 12. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1186/s40900-021-00252-7
24.	 Wolstenholme D, Grindell C, Dearden A. A co-design 
approach to service improvement resulted in teams 
exhibiting characteristics that support innovation. Design 
for Health. 2017; 1(1): 42–58. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/
24735132.2017.1295531
25.	 Steen M, Manschot M, De Koning N. Benefits of co-design 
in service design projects. International Journal of Design. 
2011; 5(2): 53–60. http://www.ijdesign.org/index.php/
IJDesign/article/view/890/346.
26.	 Shore L, Kiernan L, DeEyto A, Nic A Bhaird D, Connolly 
A, White PJ, et al. Older adult insights for age friendly 
environments, products and service Systems. Design and 
Technology Education: an International Journal. 2018; 
23(2). https://openjournals.ljmu.ac.uk/DATE/article/
view/1512/721.


=== PAGE 14 ===

14
White et al. International Journal of Integrated Care DOI: 10.5334/ijic.7618
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
White PJ, Casey BP, Cleary O, Finn E, O’Connor K, Coen N. Co-design with Integrated Care Teams: Establishing Information Needs. 
International Journal of Integrated Care, 2023; 23(4): 7, 1–14. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/ijic.7618
Submitted: 23 March 2023     Accepted: 11 October 2023     Published: 19 October 2023
COPYRIGHT:
© 2023 The Author(s). This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License (CC-BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original 
author and source are credited. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
International Journal of Integrated Care is a peer-reviewed open access journal published by Ubiquity Press.
27.	 LeCompte M, Schensul J. Designing and Conducting 
Ethnographic Research. 2nd ed. Plymouth, United 
Kingdom: AltaMira Press. 2010; 351.
28.	 Zallio M, Grey T, Boland P, Kelly H, White PJ, O’Ferrall 
E. Online – based participatory design. A Case Study of 
Developing International Standards During a Pandemic.
Strategic Design Research Journal. 2022; 15(1): 39–51. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.4013/sdrj.2021.151.05
29.	 Gibbs G. Learning by Doing: A guide to teaching and 
learning methods. Oxford: Further Education Unit. Oxford 
Polytechnic; 1988.
30.	 HSE. HSE National Framework for Governance, 
Management and Support of Health Research. Dublin: HSE; 
2021. [cited 2023 02 Aug]. Available from: https://www.
lenus.ie/handle/10147/635480.
31.	 Nielsen Norman Group Nielsen Norman Group, World 
Leaders in Research-Based User Experience. 2023. [cited 
2023 02 Aug]. Available from: https://www.nngroup.com/
articles/affinity-diagram/.
32.	 White PJ, Devitt F. Designing Personas from Design 
Ethnography and Grounded Theory. Journal of Usability 
Studies. 2021; 16(3). https://uxpajournal.org/personas-
ethnography-grounded-theory/.
33.	 Miles M, Huberman AM. Qualitative Data Analysis: An 
Expanded Sourcebook. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications; 1994.
34.	 White PJ. Designing Products for Older People’s Social 
and Emotional Needs: A Case Study. Anthropology & 
Aging. 2022; 43(2): 24–39. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5195/
aa.2022.364
35.	 Charmaz K, Mitchell GR. Grounded Theory in Ethnography. 
In: Atkinson P, Coffey A, Delamont S, Lofland J, 
Lofland L (eds.), Handbook of Ethnography. California: 
Sage Publications. 2001; 161–71. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.4135/9781848608337.n11
36.	 White PJ. Designer as Ethnographer: A Study of Domestic 
Cooking and Heating Product Design for Irish Older Adults. 
Maynooth: National University of Ireland Maynooth; 2012. 
http://mural.maynoothuniversity.ie/4740/1/PhD%20
Thesis_PJ%20White.pdf.
37.	 Finegan T, White PJ, Casey BP. ‘Living Well at Home’- 
Integrated Care for Older People in Ireland. International 
Journal of Integrated Care. 2022; 22(22(S3)): 235. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.5334/ijic.ICIC22116
38.	 White PJ, Alders G, Patocs A, Raina P. COVID-19 and 
interdisciplinary research: What are the needs of researchers 
on aging? Tuning Journal for Higher Education. 2021; 9(1): 239–
63. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18543/tjhe-9(1)-2021pp239-263
39.	 White PJ, Deevy C. Designing an Interdisciplinary Research 
Culture in Higher Education: A Case Study. Interchange. 
2020; 51(4): 499–515. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10780-020-09406-0
40.	 White PJ, Okello D, Casey BP, Najjuuko C, Lukanga R. 
Co-designing with engineers for community engagement 
in rural Uganda. Design Science. 2023; 9: e12. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1017/dsj.2023.10
