

=== PAGE 1 ===

Participatory Design of EHR Components: Crafting Novel Relational Spaces for IT 
Specialists and Hospital Staff to Cooperate 
Louise Robert¹, Laurine Moniez¹, Quentin Luzurier², David Morquin¹ 
¹ ERIOS, Espace de Recherche et d’Intégration des Outils Numériques en Santé, CHU de 
Montpellier 
² ERIOS, Espace de Recherche et d’Intégration des Outils Numériques en Santé, DEDALUS 
France 
 
Introduced in the early 2010s, Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are now ubiquitous in 
hospitals. Despite some undeniable benefits, they remain unpopular among health professionals 
and present numerous challenges. Studies have documented how EHRs lead to clerical burden, 
are insufficiently adapted to the reality of healthcare teams' work, and too often result in a loss 
of meaning and even burnout (Morquin 2019; Gardner et al. 2019; Tai-Seale et al. 2023). This 
phenomenon is a contributing factor to the ongoing human resources challenges in hospitals.  
Our research, situated at the intersection of Health Information Systems studies, 
Computer Supported Collaborative Work (CSCW), Service Design, and Participatory Design 
(PD), investigates the transformative impact of involving users in developing new EHRs 
components within a dedicated space in the hospital. It involves collaboration between a large 
University Hospital, a University, and a leading European EHR vendor. The research team's 
interdisciplinary composition ensures a comprehensive perspective in addressing these 
challenges, comprising a clinician with a PhD in Information Systems Management, four IT 
Specialists, two Service Designers, and a PhD holder in Linguistics. We have developed two 
dashboards: Firstly, one that enables all team members involved in the care of patients under 
the Mental Health Act in psychiatry to coordinate their work (Iso4Psy). Secondly, one centered 
on individual patient antimicrobial stewardship decision support (AtbViz). 
Crafting Novel Relational Spaces Through The Medium Of Design 
We are examining how integrated design practice can establish essential interaction 
spaces to overcome the historical challenges associated with the EHRs. Our research focuses 
on pinpointing the material and interactional elements that enable genuine participatory co-
design (hereafter PCD, as used by Melles 2019), positively shifting power dynamics between 
IT specialists and users, and fostering a more balanced agency in their relationship. 


=== PAGE 2 ===

 
Fig 1. Novel relational spaces through design practice  
We employ design tools to create relational areas between stakeholders, following the 
'Telling, Making, Enacting' (TME) framework (Brandt, Binder, and Sanders 2013). This 
approach ensures that our participative design methodology is deeply rooted in practice. In the 
telling phase, our methodology includes over 100 hours of ethnographic observations and semi-
structured interviews per case study as well as narrative workshops.  


=== PAGE 3 ===

 
Fig 2. The telling phase 
The making phase includes co-design workshops for dashboards development, leading to the 
production of approximately 100 paper-based prototypes for the two use cases. 
 
Fig 3. The making phase 
In the enacting phase, our evaluation protocol is collaboratively developed and includes the 
joint creation of scenarios for laboratory tests. This process entails considering the physical 
space, furniture, and props to authentically recreate situated conditions, encompassing temporal 


=== PAGE 4 ===

elements like task interruptions or time pressure. In this regard, the practice of service design 
draws a parallel with theater production (Penin and Tokinwise 2009).  
 
Fig 4. The enacting phase 
Bridging Gaps In EHR Dialogue 
We contend with a lack of clarity surrounding participatory constructs within healthcare 
(Masterson et al. 2022), a situation that, we find, further deteriorates when attention shifts from 
patients to Information Systems users, who are rarely involved (Busse et al. 2023). 
Traditionally, there has been a discrepancy between the availability of medical staff and 
management for consultation, significantly impacting EHR design. Balka et al. (2018) observed 
that healthcare managers and system designers often overlook the intricacies and variations of 
clinical practice. Overturning this perspective is crucial in our project, extending beyond 
involving doctors to include a diverse array of users.  
       This approach, however, does not diminish the significance of the perspectives and 
ideas from the development teams. An essential aspect of service design process is precisely 
considering the distinctive experiences of both the recipients and the providers (Penin and 
Tokinwise 2009). When the focus of developing health information systems (HIS) shifts from 
being strictly confined to the R&D departments of EHR vendors to hospitals, the dynamics 
undergo a significant transformation. The hospital, as characterized by Balka et al. (2018), is 
an ‘ambiguous territory’ marked by complex power dynamics. For development teams it serves 
as a non-traditional work environment. Our project also strengthens their role by actively 


=== PAGE 5 ===

engaging them in conversations with users and co-facilitating workshops. Here, too, design 
practice rebalances power dynamics and agency within these relationships. 
Results & Conclusion  
Our research has successfully transitioned from initial paper prototypes to functional 
components. Thus, the practice of design, as it becomes progressively integrated into the 
hospital, induces significant changes. In line with Manzini's argument (2011), the term 
'designing for service,' rather than 'designing services,' recognizes that what is being designed 
is not an end result, but rather a platform for action, with which diverse actors will engage over 
time. This perspective aligns with the necessity for systemic transformation within the 
development of HIS where research teams act as facilitators of multidisciplinary innovation via 
design practice (Minder and Heidemann Lassen 2018). Such a method is a crucial condition for 
designing an EHR that accurately meets the specific needs of medical professionals and their 
allies. 
       In the end, we aim to demonstrate our ability to genuinely renew the approaches used in 
the development of these software solutions that impact the entire healthcare system. However, 
the difficulties in establishing these collaborative spaces are numerous and encountered daily. 
Many competing practical pressures are at play. Creating effective interaction platforms 
between publishers, the various users, and researchers is a complex and challenging endeavor. 
It requires not only the alignment of different goals and timelines but also the nurturing of 
mutual understanding and trust (Metz et al. 2022). 
References 
Balka, Ellen, David Peddie, Serena S. Small, Christine Ackerley, Johanna Trimble, and Corinne 
M. Hohl. 2018. "Barriers to Scaling up Participatory Design Interventions in Health IT: 
A Case Study". Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference: Short 
Papers, Situated Actions, Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2, 1–5. PDC ’18. New 
York,USA:Association for Computing Machinery.https://doi.org/10.1145/3210604.32
10612. 
Brandt, Eva, Binder, Thomas and Sanders, Elizabeth. 2013. "Tools and Techniques: Ways to 
Engage Telling, Making and Enacting". Routledge International Handbook of 
Participatory Design., 1st ed. 
Busse, Theresa Sophie, Chantal Jux, Johannes Laser, Peter Rasche, Horst Christian Vollmar, 
Jan P Ehlers, and Sven Kernebeck. 2023. "Involving Health Care Professionals in the 


=== PAGE 6 ===

Development of Electronic Health Records: Scoping Review". JMIR Human Factors 
10 : e45598. https://doi.org/10.2196/45598. 
Gardner, Rebekah L., Emily Cooper, Jacqueline Haskell, Daniel A. Harris, Sara Poplau, Philip 
J. Kroth, and Mark Linzer. 2019. "Physician Stress and Burnout: The Impact of Health 
Information Technology". Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association: 
JAMIA 26 (2): 106–14. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocy145. 
Manzini. 2011. "Introduction". Design for Services. New York, Routledge. 
Minder, Bettina, and Astrid Heidemann Lassen. 2018. "The Designer as Facilitator of 
Multidisciplinary Innovation Projects". The Design Journal 21 (6): 789–811. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14606925.2018.1527513. 
Morquin, David. 2019. " Comment Améliorer l’usage Du Dossier Patient Informatisé Dans Un 
Hôpital ? : Vers Une Formalisation Habilitante Du Travail Intégrant l’usage Du Système 
d’information Dans Une Bureaucratie Professionnelle". Thèse de Doctorat, Sciences de 
Gestion. Université de Montpellier 
Penin, Lara, and Tokinwise Cameron. 2009. "The Politics and Theatre of Service Design".  
Proceedings of the Conference of the International Association of Societies of Design 
Research. IASDR Press, 4327-4338. 
Tai-Seale, Ming, Sally Baxter, Marlene Millen, Michael Cheung, Sidney Zisook, Julie Çelebi, 
Gregory Polston, et al. 2023. "Association of Physician Burnout with Perceived EHR 
Work Stress and Potentially Actionable Factors". Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, July, ocad136. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocad136. 
  
 
