

=== PAGE 1 ===

arXiv:2501.17299v1  [cs.HC]  28 Jan 2025
“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a
Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
EMILY TSENG∗, Microsoft Research, USA
MEG YOUNG∗, Data & Society, USA
MARIANNE AUBIN LE QUÉRÉ, Cornell University, USA
AIMEE RINEHART, The Associated Press, USA
HARINI SURESH, Brown University, USA
Journalism has emerged as an essential domain for understanding the uses, limitations, and impacts of large
language models (LLMs) in the workplace. News organizations face divergent ﬁnancial incentives: LLMs
already permeate newswork processes within ﬁnancially constrained organizations, even as ongoing legal
challenges assert that AI companies violate their copyright. At stake are key questions about what LLMs are
created to do, and by whom: How might a journalist-led LLM work, and what can participatory design illumi-
nate about the present-day challenges about adapting “one-size-ﬁts-all” foundation models to a given context
of use? In this paper, we undertake a co-design exploration to understand how a participatory approach to
LLMs might address opportunities and challenges around AI in journalism. Our 20 interviews with reporters,
data journalists, editors, labor organizers, product leads, and executives highlight macro, meso, and micro ten-
sions that designing for this opportunity space must address. From these desiderata, we describe the result
of our co-design work: organizational structures and functionality for a journalist-controlled LLM. In clos-
ing, we discuss the limitations of commercial foundation models for workplace use, and the methodological
implications of applying participatory methods to LLM co-design.
1
Introduction
The tenuous relationship between journalism and technological innovation has reached a new
inﬂection point. Digitization, dataﬁcation, and platformization have transformed how journalists
produce and audiences consume news [9, 17], and aﬀected the types and overall quality of news
reporting [49, 51]. As ad revenues shrink, the news industry faces a monetization crisis: more than
one third of journalists reported layoﬀs or buyouts at their organization in 2024 [37]. Even as the
industry struggles against these headwinds, sustainable news ecosystems remain vital for healthy
community attachment, toward democratic participation, and to hold powers to account [3, 14, 30].
Widespread adoption of generative AI and large language models (LLMs) has only introduced
new crises for journalists and news consumers. Today’s advanced models rely on data scraped
from news outlets [48]. Simultaneously, those very models threaten journalists’ livelihoods by
automating fundamental aspects of their craft in an industry already grappling with ﬁnancial in-
stability [32]. While language technologies have long been used for template-ready forms of news
∗Authors share equal contribution.
Authors’ Contact Information: Emily Tseng, Microsoft Research, New York, NY, USA; Meg Young, Data & Society, New
York, NY, USA; Marianne Aubin Le Quéré, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA; Aimee Rinehart, The Associated Press,
New York, NY, USA; Harini Suresh, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
TBD ’25, TBD, TBD
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 2 ===

2
Tseng et al.
production, like ﬁnancial and sports brieﬁngs [17], the newest language technologies have broad-
ened the scope of potential automated coverage. Already today, more than 80% of newsrooms are
estimated to leverage AI for newswork, and scholars, practitioners and funders are pouring energy
into understanding how these tools might change journalism [18, 43].
These challenges have led to divergent opinions and approaches to generative AI across jour-
nalism. Much of the industry is optimistic that AI could boost revenues toward stabilizing jour-
nalism’s economic crisis, by personalizing news products to audiences, increasing content reach,
and optimizing workﬂow eﬃciency [10]. Still, many journalists take issue with how tech compa-
nies have broadly proﬁted from data scraped from news outlets without sharing revenues back to
newsrooms. These tensions have led newsrooms to take concrete—and divergent—actions. Some
newsrooms have struck deals with tech companies like OpenAI, hoping to recoup their intellectual
property [36, 47]. Others have taken legal action against OpenAI and Microsoft, citing copyright
infringement [31, 41]. As newsrooms and tech companies grapple with these misaligned incentives,
society’s need for a healthy fourth estate grows.
In light of the increasing corporate capture of data and AI tools across the news industry, we
argue that there is a critical opportunity to instead pursue a participatory approach to the develop-
ment and governance of LLMs and AI, owned and led by journalists. The FAccT community has
broadly explored how participatory approaches to AI might ensure that key stakeholders, data
providers, and aﬀected communities maintain decision-making power in the design of AI systems
[44, 46]. In the present moment, where journalists’ work is expropriated by corporate LLMs with-
out compensation or design input, questions of meaningful participation are particularly salient.
With this motivation, in this work, we set out to conduct a participatory approach to building an
LLM, with, for, and led by journalists. We began by establishing a practitioner-researcher partner-
ship, including practitioners with deep experience as journalists and researchers from the FAccT
and HCI communities steeped in participatory approaches. Our team then conducted a study with
20 journalists across multiple locations, organization sizes, and roles within newsmaking (Tables
1 and 2). Through these interviews, we synthesized key tensions that must be addressed by a
journalist-controlled LLM to be successful: structural and market forces (4.1), inter-organization
competition (4.2), and eﬀects on individual journalists and newsrooms (4.3).
Responding to these tensions and as part of a co-design exercise with participants, we then
present an iterated proposal for how to structure a journalist-controlled LLM (5). We close with
reﬂections on the implications of our ﬁndings for commercial foundation models and methodologi-
cal lessons for FAccT scholars and practitioners similarly interested in helping aﬀected workforces
and communities shape these novel technologies (6).
2
Related Works
Our work sits at the intersection between AI’s eﬀect on journalism (2.1) and participatory AI (2.2).
2.1
AI in journalism
Generative AI has sprawled in inﬂuence across the news media ecosystem. The ability to produce
naturalistic and inexpensive text, images, and videos has inspired imagination across the indus-
try [34]. An estimated 82% of newsrooms use AI today, up from 37% in 2019, with the leading
use cases being the automation of news writing, data analysis, and personalization [45]. LLMs
have impacted not only how journalists produce news, but also how people consume media and
information. Audiences increasingly rely on AI-augmented services to access news content, e.g.,
through news aggregation platforms like Apple News. Search platforms, too, now use LLMs to sup-
ply information: Google, Perplexity, and other search engines now answer queries with summaries
generated from news content.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 3 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
3
The rapid uptake of these tools has not been without concern. Practitioners and scholars have
raised that AI might exacerbate issues of credibility and authenticity between journalists and their
audiences [50], especially as AI’s problems of bias, impact on privacy, and wider ethical implica-
tions remain unresolved [25]. Cools and Diakopoulos [10] synthesized a set of “perils” that loom
(lack of judgment, hallucination and biases, and loss of autonomy), even as journalists explore at-
tendant “possibilities” (eﬃciency and scale, increased personalization). These debates are familiar
in media, where journalists have long used language technologies to automate the production of
template-ready content like summaries of earnings reports, weather updates, or sports scores [1, 4].
Uptake of automation has historically been slow among journalists [27]: changes in workﬂow
can disrupt deadlines and breaking news, and their training in teasing out complicated narratives
makes them slower to adopt new technologies [20]. Against this historical hesitancy, recent uses of
AI in news have become cautionary tales. In 2023, Sports Illustrated outsourced content creation to
a third-party vendor that used generative AI to create fake author biographies and photos, inciting
debate around the lack of transparency in AI news reporting [21]. Similarly, Apple News recently
withdrew a feature that automatically summarized news stories after its LLM generated false in-
formation [40]. These missteps are likely to negatively impact public trust in news, as researchers
ﬁnd news marked as AI-generated is perceived as less trustworthy [26, 50].
Beyond these impacts on public trust in journalism, scholars and practitioners have also ex-
pressed concerns around what AI means for journalistic work. Already, journalists perceive gen-
erative AI as a greater threat, with a steeper learning curve, than prior types of automated news
writing [52]. Jones et al. [24] found journalists increasingly rely on AI tools, but do not ﬁnd these
systems “intelligible.” Exploring how newsroom stakeholders collaborate cross-functionally with
AI, Xiao et al. [55] found journalists perceived AI as particularly “inaccessible,” and argued for more
collaboration with technology companies when out-of-the-box AI tools do not meet journalistic
needs. AI’s perceived unintelligibility and inaccessibility may also be due to what Dodds et al. [19]
call knowledge silos within news organizations: how the knowledge to understand AI—technical
know-how, strategy, and ethical alignment—is currently siloed across roles, teams, and levels of
seniority, to the detriment of eﬀective understanding and adoption of these tools.
Knowledge silos are an example of how AI also stands to exacerbate tensions within the news
industry. Automation intended to improve workers’ experiences can inadvertently worsen labor
conditions. Studies show larger and more well-funded newsrooms are more likely to adopt product
innovations [27]; but corporate media ownership may also enforce speciﬁc technology solutions
intended to optimize workﬂows for eﬃciency, leading to disempowerment and alienation in the
workforce [22]. Meanwhile, journalists in smaller newsrooms face heightened work stressors, in-
cluding an increased sense of responsibility toward their communities, pervasive job insecurity,
and the need to sustain a public-facing persona [38, 39, 42]. For large corporate and smaller inde-
pendent newsrooms alike, then, the drive to adopt AI may illuminate workplace pressures that are
exacerbated, not alleviated, by the introduction of the technology.
Against this backdrop, scholars in FAccT, HCI, and other technology-oriented ﬁelds have ex-
plored the intersection of AI and journalism primarily by developing speciﬁc AI systems for jour-
nalistic use cases, and evaluating them through user studies. This line of work includes tools to aid
science journalists [35], scale content audits [5, 6], and produce short-form video scripts from news
stories [29, 53]. These AI-powered tools frequently go beyond optimizing journalistic practice, e.g.,
by proposing new technology-centric mental models for news interactions [23]. While these contri-
butions have advanced the design of systems, there remains opportunity to more deeply consider
the broader sociotechnical environment in which journalists operate.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 4 ===

4
Tseng et al.
This paper complements this literature by taking a participatory approach to developing LLMs
for journalists that centers organizational needs and decision-making, preceding human-AI inter-
faces. We argue that considering organizational needs and constraints (at both inter- and intra-
organizational scales) is key to bridging the gap between what is technically feasible, what is
organizationally realistic, and what is socially responsible. In doing so, we push the scholarship
on AI and journalism to consider more agentic roles for journalists, in an ecosystem where control
of journalistic work is heavily contested.
2.2
Participatory approaches to LLMs
To address the perils and possibilities of AI in journalism, we adopt what FAccT has framed as a
participatory approach to AI. This approach recognizes ﬁrst that the development of AI models, as
well as the compilation and storage of the datasets they are trained on, is heavily centralized within
large corporations [28]. Downstream applications and users must accept a pre-trained model as-is,
without control over or transparency into data sources, underlying design decisions, ﬁne-tuning or
alignment procedures, and future data or model changes. While open-source models are seemingly
more transparent, it is typically only model weights that are released, not datasets; and the sheer
size of such models renders them diﬃcult to audit by those without access to signiﬁcant compute
[54].
Participatory approaches stand as a potential antidote to these imbalances [15]: to distribute
power to those who typically do not have it [2, 7, 12]. Scholars have characterized a spectrum of
approaches, from those that are more tokenistic (e.g., one-time user feedback that shapes model
ﬁne-tuning) to those that attempt to meaningfully share decision-making power (e.g., sustained
relationships with aﬀected communities who are involved in many project stages, from data col-
lection to evaluation) [44]. The problem of how to meaningfully share power is particularly chal-
lenging for today’s LLMs, due to their centralized and largely corporate control, and the scale of
resources devoted to their commercialization as “one-size-ﬁts-all” technologies [46].
Writing in 2024, Suresh et al. [46] proposed that scholars and practitioners attend to domain-
speciﬁc participatory design of LLMs, via attention to organizational as well as technical infras-
tructures. Our work builds on their call to do this for journalism, with journalists. In doing so, we
draw out lessons not only for journalism as a domain for AI application, but also participatory
design and governance of AI.
3
Methods
Our work took a participatory approach based on (i) participatory action research, (ii) semi-structured
interviews, and (iii) co-design. In AI and technology design, participatory methods oﬀer principles
and practices for researchers to more fully collaborate with communities impacted by technology,
and to better reﬂect their values, preferences, and needs in resulting systems [15]. Our methods
were approved by a university Institutional Review Board (IRB).
3.1
Participatory action research (PAR)
PAR is an approach to embedding research in a community’s real-world needs and concerns. To
begin, a research team forges a close collaboration with a person or organization in a ﬁeld of inter-
est (the ﬁeld partner). Throughout a study, the research team centers the questions most salient to
the ﬁeld partner, analyzes data with the partner, and works with the partner to decide next steps:
an iterative and collaborative process known as the “action-reﬂection cycle” [11, 13].
Our team ﬁrst met our ﬁeld partner, a senior product manager working for a national news orga-
nization, for a conversation about how newsrooms can better assert intellectual property protec-
tions against data scraping from AI companies. Through these conversations, we noticed overlap
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 5 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
5
in our goals: the researchers wanted to think through this complex set of problems as a case study
in participatory AI, and our ﬁeld partner wanted to reﬁne institutional responses that could help
the news industry navigate these challenges.
Our research goals evolved through the action-reﬂection cycle. Initially, we planned to create
a working demo of a journalist-led LLM using newsroom partners’ data. As we worked toward
the prototype, we realized more research was needed to understand the macroeconomic factors
constraining and incentivizing newsroom investment in AI, the inter-organizational considera-
tions shaping how newsrooms regarded each other, and user-level opportunities and challenges
for LLM tools. With our ﬁeld partner, we set the following research questions:
RQ1 Macro: What are the market and structural factors that shape newsroom decision-making
about AI?
RQ2 Meso: What are the organizational and technical requirements needed to enable the creation
of a participatory design-created, newsroom-owned, and journalism-speciﬁc LLM?
RQ3 Micro: What new functionality might a participatory LLM enable in a journalist’s day-to-
day—and what material and aﬀective demands would participation levy upon them in re-
turn?
3.2
Semi-structured interviews
We conducted 20 semi-structured interviews with reporters, data journalists, editors, labor orga-
nizers, product leads, and executives of news organizations, as well as leaders of nonproﬁts dedi-
cated supporting news organizations. Our sampling strategy aimed to speak with those from both
large organizations and small; online-only, newspapers, radio, and TV broadcast; varied ownership
and revenue models; and diﬀerent relationships to AI companies, including those receiving grants
from companies like OpenAI and those using commercially available tools. (See Tables 1 and 2
for details). Participants were recruited via email outreach to relevant professional networks. In-
terviews were 60 minutes long, and all participants were oﬀered $50 Visa gift cards for completed
interviews. Not all participants accepted a gift card. Interviews were conducted online over Zoom
and recorded for transcription.
Each interview had two parts. First, a descriptive section, which set out to understand the per-
son’s role and responsibilities, and how they currently used AI, if at all. Questions probed the par-
ticipant’s perspective on newsroom readiness to contribute data toward a hypothetical industry-
controlled LLM: for example, participants were asked to describe how much of their archive is
digitized, and in what formats.
3.3
Participatory design methods
Part two of each interview drew on participatory design ﬁction [33], a form of artifact-based inter-
viewing. In this method, researchers use artifacts (like low- or medium-ﬁdelity technology proto-
types or hypothetical speciﬁcations) as probes for eliciting knowledge from users that is otherwise
challenging to access directly or in the abstract, such as ethical values and contextual considera-
tions. To elicit the value proposition and organizational constraints that would shape their interest
in a participatory LLM, we created a PDF inviting participants to join a would-be organization
called the “Newsroom Tooling Alliance.” Our probe included an invitation email and a 1-page pro-
posal of an inter-organizational collaboration to create a journalism-speciﬁc LLM. Our artifact is
included in Appendix B.
Participants were reminded that the invitation was not from an actual organization, but instead
was a way to understand key contours of the context that such an initiative must address. Interview-
ers encouraged participants to be honest about the limits and fundamental barriers of the artifact.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 6 ===

6
Tseng et al.
Following seminal work on navigating participant response bias in HCI [16], we were also at-
tentive to power dynamics in this exchange. Many interviewees worked in leadership positions,
a vantage point that helped support their candid appraisal. When interviewing more precarious
workers, such as frontline reporters or editors, interviewers emphasized the value of their exper-
tise and the team’s interest in their views on the limits and problems with the proposal.
3.4
Data analysis
All interviews were recorded on Zoom and transcribed by Trint and Otter AI. Transcripts were
cross-checked by a human researcher for accuracy. Data was analyzed using an iterative induc-
tive qualitative coding approach based on grounded theory [8]. Our initial code categories corre-
sponded to our research questions: macro, for market-level factors shaping newsroom decision-
making about AI; meso, for inter-organizational factors shaping newsrooms’ decisions to partake
in LLMs; and micro, for user-level needs and functionality that a journalism-speciﬁc LLM would
enable. Through numerous discussions as a research team, we made iterative passes through the
data to surface sub-categories in each of these areas, which we consolidated through additional
passes to arrive at a ﬁnal set of codes.
Our ﬁnal set of codes and coded data resulted in desiderata for a participant-led LLM. However,
some of our ﬁndings could not be fully resolved at the level of design speciﬁcations: instead, we
came to understand them as “constitutive tensions”: key frictions underlying the creation of a par-
ticipatory LLM for journalism to which our own design must respond. These tensions are reported
in 4, and our iterated design is reported in 5.
4
Tensions
Our interviews and design methods revealed a complex set of tensions at the macro, meso, and
micro levels that shape journalism as a design space for a participatory AI.
4.1
Macro tensions
Our ﬁndings complement literature on the ﬁnancial pressures in journalism (2.1) with a deeper
look at how newsrooms large and small consider AI. Interviewees described intense pressures
at the level of market dynamics, professional culture, and strategy (the “macro”). Participants de-
scribed tensions around: (i) the push to create more content versus the reality of diminishing re-
sources; (ii) the need to follow audience changes in how they consume information versus industry
loss of control; (iii) the need for agility and novel competencies versus the traditional culture and
norms of the profession; and (iv) the beneﬁts of partnering with existing technology companies
versus concerns of just compensation and fairness. Importantly, many described these centrifugal
forces as pulling the industry in diﬀerent directions, both toward and away from using AI, and
thus eliciting ambivalent or “competing thoughts” (P04) for those on-the-ground.
4.1.1
The push to create more content versus the reality of diminishing resources. First, echoing the
literature (2.1), participants reported tremendous pressure on newsrooms to make more content
with diminishing resources. Many noted industry-wide nosedives in audiences and revenues, even
as public appetite for content skyrockets. P11 reported that local newsrooms struggle to make
payroll and operate at a constant and acute risk of closing. These trends have a long history, many
recounted, including how the classiﬁed ads that sustained print newspapers were replaced by
Internet disruptors like Craigslist, and how broadcasting has suﬀered as fewer consumers pay
for cable.
Even as income streams fall, many of the costs to reporting and verifying information remain
high. P09 described the industry as “bleeding money.” P11 pointed out that even large technology
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 7 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
7
companies like Facebook, who had previously been interested in hiring journalists, had discovered
“the costs of getting things right”, and focused instead on becoming aggregators: “somebody else
does all the hard work and then you just bundle it and grab the proﬁts: brilliant and capitalist, but
not so good for democracy” (P11). These quotes reinforce the hard truth that reporting news is
inherently resource-intensive, due to the work needed to collect novel information and fact-check
it for accuracy. Market realities of decreasing revenues collide with high costs of reporting, raising
pressures on newsrooms to do more with less.
4.1.2
The need to follow audience changes in how they consume information versus industry loss
of control. Part of the margin-tightening described above is due to the concomitant reality that
the industry is losing its share of its audience, who are shifting news consumption habits more
readily than the industry has adapted its business models. Several participants analogized the
present shifts with AI companies to past experiences with social media platforms, during which
newsrooms were subject to capricious changes in how newsfeed algorithms worked—dramatically
changing news industry revenues overnight. As P13 recalled: “Facebook gave [newsrooms] a ton of
traﬃc for free for a long time and then suddenly changed direction. It is very possible that OpenAI and
these other platforms will do the same thing.” These past experiences with the unpredictability of
the tech industry underscored an overall desire for greater industry self-determination, including
payment structures that beneﬁt newsrooms and restore their control over the delivery and mone-
tization of their content. As P02 stated, “Google and Facebook should be paying us if they’re going
to be using our content to draw people to their platforms.”
4.1.3
The need for agility and novel competencies versus the traditional culture and norms of the
profession. Third, many participants noted that the technical competencies and appetite for in-
novation needed to adopt AI contrasted sharply against the timeworn traditional culture of the
journalistic profession. One respondent described how in the past, “The cultural norm was ‘Don’t
oﬀend anybody, don’t break anything.’ You were punished for ﬁxing a wheel that wasn’t broken, for
innovation.” (P11). Participants also described how attitudes toward innovation today depend on
an organization’s size and resources. Not all newsrooms employ people trained in technology and
innovation, e.g., product people, engineers, designers and developers. While larger news conglom-
erates have these roles, the long tail of smaller newsrooms often lacked the in-house technical
personnel and resources to “to fully tap into [new technologies] and don’t even know where to get
started” (P14). At the same time, all respondents acknowledged the need for the industry to adapt
despite these frictions. As P04 said, “AI is inevitable, so it makes sense to get ahead of it or to use
it in a way that is not extractive to the industry.” This quote underscores what many participants
expressed: that the industry has no choice but to ﬁnd a path forward, ideally on its own terms.
4.1.4
The benefits of partnering with existing technology companies versus concerns of just compen-
sation and fairness. Fourth, respondents described the industry as facing a diﬃcult decision. On the
one hand, they noted many beneﬁts of relying on AI companies’ payments in the form of licensing
agreements, products, or other forms of partnership. On the other, many described a deep sense of
oﬀense at how AI companies have been able to monetize work they did not do or pay for. As P05
said, “I’ll be honest that it’s also just my own strong sense of justice. I get really pissed oﬀwhen people
steal from us.” This frustration extended beyond leaders of smaller newsrooms to those who run
multi-outlet news organizations. As P09 said: “I hate the idea that The New York Times can strike a
deal with OpenAI, but OpenAI just, like, takes my shit. Google’s the same way. They’re all the same.
I’m a businessman, but I have no bargaining power. I live at the pleasure of the platform. So the rich
are getting richer, the poor are getting poorer.” Indeed, many participants expressed this sense of
powerlessness, in which they were being forced to respond to forces beyond their control. As P04,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 8 ===

8
Tseng et al.
a local news leader, said: “Can you really get ahead of it? Do you wind up just participating in the
demise?”
Part of participants’ frustrations were due to a trend in which many larger newsrooms have
begun to explore licensing agreements with OpenAI. In the last year, News Corp (which includes
The Wall Street Journal and The Times UK), Condé Nast (of The New Yorker, Vogue, WIRED, etc.),
Vox Media, and Axios have all signed agreements to allow OpenAI to use their data for products
like ChatGPT. Indeed, many interviewees said their leadership were interested in similar licensing
deals, as a way to supplement declining revenues from other sources. As P14, who leads a large
news organization, explained, “For folks like us, and The New York Times or Hearst, the primary
question is: how do we protect this data, make it accessible and ensure that it’s a revenue source for
us going forward? Because it can be a revenue source if you tap into it correctly.” As this and other
participants pointed out, the promise of the largest possible licensing deal payments therefore
draws news organizations toward the largest AI companies.
Smaller newsrooms, too, are beginning to be solicited by AI companies—primarily as users of
their commercial products, rather than as licensing partners. Some respondents were working on
projects funded by the $10 million dollar investment by Microsoft and OpenAI in media outlets
like The Minnesota Star Tribune, The Philadelphia Enquirer, and The Seattle Times.1 This engage-
ment includes extensive credits for enterprise access to ChatGPT—leading to concerns of unequal
power and overreliance on one particular platform and corporate actor. As P13 explained, “Anyone
who gets a grant...also gets access to an enterprise account through OpenAI. But we’re trying to not
get [the journalists] hooked on OpenAI, we want them to explore with all the diﬀerent tools. ” 2 In
explaining their readiness to build on top of tools from OpenAI and other AI companies, some ex-
pressed a belief that there is no building an alternative tool that could compete from a performance
perspective, or that there is no realistic way to ﬁnd the investment to do so.
In addition to concerns around the dominance of speciﬁc high-proﬁle AI tools like ChatGPT,
participants also expressed concerns about the industry coming to rely on AI tools more generally.
Multiple respondents noted personal reservations and newsroom policies against using commer-
cial LLMs for content creation. As P15 explained, following an observation he appreciated from
technologist Cory Doctorow: “These models are extremely diﬃcult and time consuming, expensive,
and energy-intensive to create, and they don’t fulﬁll any high-value, low-risk tolerance use cases. So
the only thing that AI companies might do is market capture: get as many people as they can to rely
on these, so when they do need to make money, they can just jack prices higher. ” Interviewees who
had concerns like these were more supportive of a participatory, journalist-led LLM; the prospect
of alternate models that could better attend to questions about fairness, user control, and tailoring
for news workplaces as a design context.
4.2
Meso tensions
Given the structural tensions and ambivalence described in Section 4.1, how might news organiza-
tions at diﬀerent sizes and localities cooperate toward a collectively owned LLM? In this section,
we unpack the design context at the level of inter-organizational tensions (the “meso”). We ﬁnd
that to create conditions for inter-organizational collaboration, a participatory LLM must address
sensitivities around (i) mutual beneﬁt versus competition with rivals, (ii) data pooling versus data
protection, (iii) enabling versus constraining novel uses, and (iv) collective action versus local con-
trol.
1https://www.theverge.com/2024/10/22/24276747/microsoft-openai-news-outlets-10-million-ai-tools
2Recalling our second tension, this quote underlines the uneasy nature of newsroom use of large AI companies’ tools: while
many participants are eager to pilot and test new features, there is also a wariness to become locked-in.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 9 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
9
4.2.1
Mutual benefit versus competition with rivals. Participants voiced enthusiasm for some form
of cooperation between news organizations, as part of an industry response to the market pres-
sures described in the last section. However, participants who were at larger organizations noted
barriers of “competitive defensiveness,” where “everyone is trying to ﬁgure out how to do AI better
than their immediate competitors” (P19). At the same time, many participants observed coopera-
tion could help save the long tail of smaller and more local newsrooms, by providing them with
access to costly technical resources they would otherwise lack. P16 observed that any move to
take “technical weight” oﬀthe shoulders of hyperlocal journalists would help them survive—and
noted that helping smaller publishers adapt to AI “would be incredibly exciting to anybody who
watches the industry, and cares about democracy and the country and the world.” As this quote high-
lights, helping smaller newsrooms survive in an AI-inﬂuenced landscape was seen as a broader
and industry-wide mission that could motivate larger organizations toward cooperation. For a col-
lective structure to work, this broader mission would need to be suﬃciently motivating in both
the short- and long-term.
4.2.2
Data pooling versus data protection. Data rights were one particularly thorny ﬂashpoint
for tensions around cooperation and competition. Attuned to issues around ownership of news
and copyright of journalistic work, many nevertheless saw beneﬁts to sharing work product with
each other through data pooling toward a participatory LLM, especially to enable, e.g., “stitch-
ing together geographies from a local perspective” (P16). Some respondents recalled examples from
COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns where comparing notes between localities would have been help-
ful to not only local outlets, but also the general public. To attain those beneﬁts, participants sought
guarantees on how individual organizations or freelancers could get credit and proportional rev-
enue share for their contributions.
Participants also saw a need to ensure some work could remain proprietary, even in an active
collaboration or data pooling agreement. Many identiﬁed a precedent: how journalists collaborate
on investigative reporting, by pooling documents. P01, who had spent time in investigations before
their current role, recalled: “the general rule is, if you’re worried that if someone else sees it, you’re
going to be in trouble, you just don’t put it in any database. Like just keep it locked down as much
as possible.” To many participants, time-worn social and technical protocols have been developed
to keep data safe for investigative reporting, and could be adapted to pool data for a participatory
LLM. Every piece of work that fell outside of this boundary could be shared, if there were tools for
attributing credit and sharing revenue.
4.2.3
Enabling versus constraining novel uses. Downstream of data rights, participants saw practi-
cal and philosophical tensions in how participating news organizations could agree on use cases.
This was a key concern for the proposed structure, as participation in the alliance would also in-
clude performing audits to ensure the tool performed within collectively agreed boundaries. If
one participating newsroom supported one use case from a jointly created participatory LLM, and
another vehemently opposed it, how should the collective proceed?
One axis on which participants saw potential use case disagreement was the divide between
maximizing journalists’ eﬃciency and creating new and innovative uses. P03 had piloted AI-backed
capabilities with a network of news organizations at diﬀerent levels of scale. To him, newsrooms’
willingness to spend time innovating was a function of their size and level of resourcing: “You
might have a well-equipped newsroom think about using [AI] in creative new ways, versus a news-
room that’s vastly under-resourced and would rather spend time on shortcuts for rote tasks” (P03).
Others, however, believed this might be related to the type of organization rather than its size:
startup-like newsrooms would support innovation, while more traditional newsrooms would re-
main entrenched in institutional ways of doing things.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 10 ===

10
Tseng et al.
Participants also saw how this tension might manifest in how to align decision-making pro-
cesses across diﬀerent scales. P11 said smaller and independent newsrooms would lead the charge
toward novel uses, out of “real appetite, real innovation, and real openness”. To P11, this impulse
was borne from desperation. Invoking a deadly creature from Game of Thrones and the deadly
circumstances of the Titanic, he said: “small operators are staring in the eyes of the white walkers,
so to speak. They see the iceberg, and they are trying to survive.” Larger newsrooms, on the other
hand, were likely to be stymied by institutional bureaucracy, or an impulse to “defer to the next
staﬀmeeting” (P11).
4.2.4
Collective action versus local control. Many participants said that the entity who would lead
a participatory LLM would have a large bearing on how it is received by peers. The alliance would
be maximally trustworthy if led by people with actual journalism experience; but even within that
constraint, many voiced concerns around representation and accountability. Questions included
whether voting rights would be allocated evenly or in proportion to the size of a given member
organization; as well as where freelancers would ﬁt in. There was, too, the question of how funding
would inﬂuence the broader project: whether leadership were backed by corporate, nonproﬁt, or
foundation entities in their day jobs, and what funding sources ultimately sustained the project
itself.
Crucially, participants said, the leadership of a participatory LLM would need to carefully man-
age the project’s relationship to labor organizing. For example, if a participatory LLM initiative
were to approach a newsroom for membership, they would need to negotiate not only with man-
agement but also some representatives of the workers, whether in a formalized union or a less
formal committee. And since membership in the participatory LLM might entail such contractual
commitments as revenue sharing, training and upskilling, and sharing of data rights, joining the
initiative could limit or run afoul of that newsroom’s existing contract negotiations. As one par-
ticipant at a unionized newsroom put it: “You could potentially organize workers against each other,
which would be a huge risk” (P18).
Finally, several participants pointed out that the participatory LLM initiative would also need to
manage how member organizations worked with corporate tech actors. What would a member do
if it were individually approached by a large tech company to create their own partnership agree-
ment? As P06 described, “[Is a participatory LLM project] going to have the funding to pay us what
OpenAI would would pay for that same data? Because if not, then maybe through commercial pres-
sures, we just have to go with the larger company.” One participant saw risk in smaller newsrooms
allying with larger news organizations, because smaller newsrooms would “never be on OpenAI
or Google’s radar” (P14). Maintaining long-term cooperation would require not only clear beneﬁts
for the larger organizations at the outset, but also structures for accountability in the face of this
prospect.
4.3
Micro tensions
Our research also identiﬁed tensions in how a participatory LLM would inﬂuence the day-to-day
work of individual journalists and editors (the “micro”). We identiﬁed several functions for a par-
ticipatory LLM that would make it most valuable to journalists—as well as reservations they had
about relying on new tools. These tensions include (i) whether existing commercial LLMs are ad-
equate, versus the need for a participatory LLM, (ii) how to realize eﬃciency versus preserve the
human element of newswork, and (iii) expanding versus exceeding or replacing existing labor
capacity.
4.3.1
Whether existing commercial LLMs are adequate versus the need for a participatory LLM.
Participants listed many use cases that would make LLMs valuable to their workﬂows, many of
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 11 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
11
which converge with needs assessed in previous work (2.1). Many were excited about the potential
to speed and democratize access to data journalism, like projects to dig through municipal records
or generate interactive charts and graphs. Other potential uses included support for rote tasks
like data scraping, preparation, and processing; optimizing headlines for search engine and reader
interest; ﬂagging articles for claims that require a fact-check; searching a newsroom’s archives;
analyzing the makeup of local residents to identify ways to better serve them as an audience (and
thereby grow the subscriber base); and supporting the reporting process through, e.g., looking for
patterns in data, or suggesting archival material.
However, these ideas invited deeper questions about the ﬁtness of existing commercial LLMs
for these use cases, versus the additional beneﬁts of a journalist-controlled, participatory LLM.
Several participants already used commercial LLMs in their work, including tools to transcribe
audio, suggest headlines, or choose photos for articles. P03 described how in their newsroom,
the sole senior video producer was already using Claude to generate detailed “shot lists” for less-
experienced producers to go record in the ﬁeld. At ﬁrst glance, this example seems to illustrate the
ﬁtness of existing AI models for newsroom purposes, and indicate no need to create a journalist-
led alternative. However, P03 clariﬁed that this use case was an exception, and more broadly, their
organization has a policy against sharing information with commercial models: “The possibility
that we’re leaking out our copyrighted material to models that are being trained on it, and that it
could somehow jeopardize our business down the road....[it feels] a little bit threatening.” This quote
clariﬁes that whereas today’s commercial models seem to meet the needs of journalists, on closer
read, many newsrooms are instead wary of disclosing their proprietary data to commercial tools.
4.3.2
Realizing eﬀiciency versus preserving the human element. Journalists and editors described
the ways that adapting LLMs for their workﬂows will help them become more eﬃcient. One
person—a journalist who also had a background in coding—described using an LLM to digest API
documentation and generate the right code for a complex API call, a process that “would have been
an afternoon’s work otherwise, and instead took 10 minutes” (P06). Even outside of coding tasks, par-
ticipants described how a broader shift toward digitization has pushed many new skills and rote
tasks onto journalists’ shoulders, like cross-platform content creation and audience optimization.
As a result, the promise of reducing burdens on their time is a strong value proposition for LLMs.
As one participant put it: “How do we start to claw back the time so we can use the highest and best
use of our brains to do the things that really matter?” (P01). Many respondents wanted to recover
time for the necessarily human aspects of journalism: sourcing, showing up to civic meetings, and
being present in their communities. In this sense, participants viewed journalism as a frontline
and fundamentally relational and human type of work: “only a person’s skills and connections and
communities are going to yield the information we need. We can’t manufacture that with an API”
(P03).
At the same time, interviewees expressed concerns about what can be lost when newsrooms
come to rely on automation. The idea of using AI to fully automate content creation was partic-
ularly stirring. P10, a community-based reporter, said: “The spirit of the storytelling is not there if
you’re just using it to do everything for you”. P07 agreed, giving an example in which AI-fueled
journalism viscerally upset their professional ethics: “A local newspaper got national attention for
an avatar-based, auto-generated newscast. We were all very repulsed by the notion”. Participants’ de-
sire for human voices, from both reporters and sources, was deeper than a sensibility: it reﬂected
an appreciation for complexity, contradiction, and human nuance: “We as humans can understand
that two people could see the exact same thing happen and come up with two diﬀerent stories about
what it means or even what happened. And the AI I’ve played with so far doesn’t ever seem to under-
stand that you could have two diﬀerent sources on something that say things that aren’t coherent or
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 12 ===

12
Tseng et al.
congruent” (P02). This quote illustrates the importance of multi-vocality, polysemy, and ambiguity
in storytelling: qualities that any newswriting pipeline must center, whether LLM-assisted or not.
4.3.3
Expanding versus exceeding or replacing existing labor capacity. Finally, we found respon-
dents were amenable to how a participatory LLM approach could expand their knowledge, com-
pensate them for their labor, and help alleviate their strained capacities. However, they were also
ultimately very cautious about how introducing any automation might threaten their jobs.
Many participants were excited about how participating in an LLM project could expand their
own knowledge and skills—even if doing so would create new job tasks and burdens. The hands-on
experience of creating and maintaining an LLM would introduce new types of work that would
naturally be met with resistance, respondents said. However, many felt the incentives of a cooper-
ative structure could overcome resistance to the new work it would require, and ultimately lower
barriers to adoption of the resulting technology: “we’re not giving you a bunch of happy talk, we’re
actually giving you an ownership stake in the work that you’re producing” (P09). More broadly, sev-
eral participants said the work of participation in the LLM would itself be educational for reporters,
who sometimes felt they lacked knowledge of ML, AI, and LLMs. Such work could equip journal-
ists to better serve and inform the public about this increasingly salient topic. As P18 said: “this is
exactly the kind of labor that’s needed to demystify what this stuﬀis”.
Even as they saw how a participatory LLM could expand their skills and capacity, participants
had concerns about how the introduction of any automation could risk displacing their labor in-
stead. Echoing the literature (2.1), respondents were clear: journalists, as a workforce, are already
very constrained in time, capacity, and resourcing, and the introduction of automation has a his-
tory of encouraging the elimination of their jobs, instead of augmenting their work. As P09 said:
“There’s two dominant emotions [around AI], suspicion and fear. You say this is R2-D2, but it’s actu-
ally the Terminator.” This concern was present even for use cases that seemed ripe for automation,
like auto-generating stories from sports scores. P01 had asked a colleague about that use case, and
shared, “He’s like, ‘My team is really afraid that if we do this, they’re going to lose their jobs.’ I said,
no, they’re going to be able to do more.” Many of our interviewees invoked this deeper suspicion
of AI and the premises for its adoption. Respondents agreed that any LLM, however participatory,
would need to stick to use cases that supported journalists’ work, and be governed to avoid use
cases that would replace them.
5
Co-design Result
Responding to the tensions described in 4, we present the results of our co-designed proposal for a
journalism-speciﬁc LLM. First, a cooperative of member news organizations would work to create,
steward, maintain, and promote a journalist-controlled LLM—what we have dubbed through our
co-design work the Newsroom Tooling Alliance (NTA).
NTA members commit to contributing some of their work product to a collective pool of data,
under terms governed by a common data use agreement. NTA would be responsible for supporting
the costs associated with data intake through grant funds; there would be no cost of contribution to
the members. Members have the right to include or exclude data at their discretion, e.g., to exclude
reporter’s notes but include their historical archives. The amount and quality of data contributed
is used to prorate an individual member’s revenue-share, to incentivize members to share more
data. Data provenance is carefully traced to facilitate members’ ability to remove their data from
the pool.
NTA staﬀdata scientists would use the pooled data to ﬁne-tune the most transparent and con-
sentful open-source LLM available (or to experiment with creating a de novo LLM) in order to
develop applications for journalistic tasks. One crucial piece of NTA membership is the ability
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 13 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
13
and responsibility to vote on what use cases their data will be used for. NTA staﬀdata scientists
implement these applications, and set up structures for members to help maintain them by evalu-
ating their performance against holistic criteria. For example, if the NTA were to vote in favor of
developing a product for automatically generating articles based on sports scores, members would
be enlisted to audit the generated text for correctness (e.g., whether the scores and play-by-plays
are accurate), bias (e.g., whether men and women athletes are discussed in equally empowering
ways), or depth of coverage (e.g., whether the stories miss important contextual details). This focus
on participation in both design and governance ensures NTA products have a value-add over what
could be developed without its journalist-led structure.
NTA members are billed for their usage of NTA tools at cost. Long-term, the NTA would also ex-
plore other revenue models, such as licensing access to newsroom data or releasing NTA products
to non-members. One near-term priority would be to raise money for legal fees, in order to sup-
port members who might want to protect their intellectual property from companies appropriating
their data through unlicensed scraping. NTA would also ensure its agreements with members are
non-exclusive, so that members may partner with other LLM companies if necessary.
The NTA would be led by a steering committee comprised of people working in journalism. The
committee is charged with intentionally representing the interests of larger news conglomerates,
smaller independent organizations, and freelancers. The exact charter of the committee (e.g., term
limits, voting mechanisms, accountability) would be decided in a cooperative manner by NTA’s
founding members, and revisited on a regular basis by NTA’s constituents. The NTA would also
commit to transparency and accountability as to its own funding. The growth of the NTA would be
a key responsibility of its steering committee. In approaching news organizations for membership,
the NTA would consult not only formal leadership, but also separately with representatives of
news workers.
Lastly, the NTA is designed to champion not only the core activities of creating and maintaining
an LLM and journalism-speciﬁc applications, but also educational and community-building work
around AI and journalism. This work includes connecting members to each other to commiserate
on common challenges and answer questions, and stewarding resources for the general public on
how LLMs and AI work.
6
Discussion
We have mapped journalists’ needs as a design space for a participatory LLM (4), and presented the
result of our co-design: a proposal for a journalism-speciﬁc LLM collective that responds to these
needs (5). Here, we draw out the implications of these contributions for this moment in journalism
and AI, and for FAccT: (i) the limits of relying on commercial foundation models for journalism,
(ii) applying participatory methods to LLMs, and (iii) future work.
6.1
On the limits of relying on commercial foundation models for journalism
As reviewed in 2.1, the news industry is rapidly adopting generative AI, even as industry-wide
ﬁnancial pressures mean many consider the technology a threat to their work [52]. Prior work
positioned journalists’ willingness to take up AI and LLMs as a function of their level of familiar-
ity with these tools: for example, Xiao et al. [55] found journalists consider LLMs “inaccessible” in
large part because technology companies guard LLMs behind a steeper learning curve than pre-
vious language technologies. To this literature, our work contributes a new argument: that today,
commercial LLMs are so tightly controlled as corporate assets that they are ill-suited for journal-
ism.
Our ﬁndings show that journalists are not uninterested in LLMs’ capabilities; they are instead
wary speciﬁcally of relying too much on commercial LLMs like ChatGPT (4.1). Past experiences
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 14 ===

14
Tseng et al.
of unpredictability from big tech partners, a sense of unfairness, and a desire for greater control
over important matters like monetization and newsroom-facing functionality all disincline some
newsrooms from relying too heavily on the LLMs released by large tech companies. Even the
newsrooms who do opt to partner AI companies expressed ambivalence. P13, whose organization
receives money and enterprise accounts for ChatGPT from OpenAI, nevertheless said her orga-
nization is “trying to not get them hooked” on the tool—invoking OpenAI’s philanthropy in the
journalism space with the same language used for addiction. Journalists’ ambivalence towards
today’s LLMs mirrors what Higgins-Dobney [22] noted in 2021—that technology imposed “from
the outside” can lead its intended users instead towards alienation and disempowerment. Given
the $10M total in grants that Microsoft and OpenAI made to local newsrooms in 2024, and their
expanded investment in Axios Local in early 2025, many more newsrooms will soon be in the
position to navigate these tensions.
Ultimately, our investigation points to the overall value and community interest in trusted al-
ternatives to the most dominant commercial LLMs. A participatory LLM initiative will give news-
rooms more control over how their data is used and monetized, power over what functionality
is prioritized for development, and the assurance that they are not subject to the capricious deci-
sions of an external partner. Of course, commercial LLMs are not without their merits: they are
convenient, and some respondents felt that a participatory LLM would not be able to compete with
commercial models on task performance, since today’s AI companies pour untold resources into
ensuring their models are “one-size-ﬁts-all” technologies capable of mediating any sector or use
case. However, our ﬁndings suggest there are other salient factors for newsrooms choosing which
LLM to use, beyond the narrow lens of quantiﬁable task performance: trust, predictability, ﬁnan-
cial remuneration and a sense of justice. There is, too, the possibility that a journalist-controlled
LLM, ﬁne-tuned speciﬁcally for journalist-deﬁned tasks, and evaluated holistically by journalists,
may actually outperform out-of-the-box LLMs on the functions that matter (a question we leave
to future work). Following Suresh et al. [46], this ﬁnding invites the opportunity to investigate the
same question in other ﬁelds that are rapidly being mediated by foundation models, like ﬁnance
and healthcare.
6.2
Applying participatory methods to LLMs
Our contributions are also methodological: we illustrate a worked example of Suresh et al. [46]’s
call for applying participatory methods to LLMs. Our approach anchored with a partner organiza-
tion using PAR, interviewed people from a range of roles, and co-designed a resulting sociotechni-
cal system with them. In this, we strove to achieve a level of participation desired in this research
tradition, but often less achieved: inviting participants to set the terms of the engagement. By al-
lowing participants more ownership over the process, we moved toward what Delgado et al. [15]
and Suresh et al. [46] describe as more meaningful forms of participation. Our approach also al-
lowed us to take a technical topic (LLMs) and engage with domain experts from a range of levels
of familiarity with AI, to ensure our focus remained on real-world constraints and problems rather
than technical imaginaries.
Allowing participants more ownership over the co-design process helped us realize more holis-
tic and fundamental desiderata, upstream of performance on deﬁned tasks. Our participants were
very concerned with the organizational arrangements around the LLM proposal: how participation
should be structured, on what terms, and to produce what value. Notably, participants at small and
large newsrooms alike were excited at the possibility of developing LLM applications that were
more attuned to their communities’ needs, by contributing their knowledge via data sharing and
their eﬀorts via evaluation and auditing. They were also interested in the aﬀective and community-
building eﬀects of participatory approaches to LLMs, e.g., the possibility of simply learning more
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 15 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
15
about these technologies, and teaching others. From this, we argue participatory approaches to-
ward LLMs provide three core beneﬁts that should be considered desiderata for LLM eﬀorts more
generally: (i) the ability to conduct holistic and highly contextual evaluations, incentivized by giv-
ing domain experts an ownership stake; (ii) improved coverage of diverse perspectives via respon-
sible data sharing; and (iii) education and capacity-building. Each of these goals may, at times, seem
orthogonal to traditional performance metrics, but our work shows they are essential to realize
the full potential of these systems — and achievable most clearly through participatory approaches
like the one we explore here.
6.3
Limitations
This study provides the basis for an ongoing stream of work, in which we follow community
interest toward developing a working prototype. However, our work was also limited; our inves-
tigation was qualitative and did not make use of technical artifacts (such as a working prototype
of a system) to which participants could respond. Complementary work could explore alternative
elicitation and design methods, to better understand users’ needs in practice.
7
Conclusion
In a moment when AI companies have ingested vast amounts of news data, and now are being
sued by—or are partnering with—newsrooms, the news industry has become an important site
for understanding the uses and impacts of LLMs in the workplace. In this work, we drew on par-
ticipatory methods to holistically understand the news industry as a design space, and explore
the potential of a journalist-led and -controlled LLM. Our 20 interviews with news practitioners
reveal enabling and constraining conditions for newsrooms to collaborate on co-designing, gov-
erning, and maintaining their own LLM. We characterize the key macro, meso, and micro tensions
animating newsroom decision-making about AI (4), and present a co-designed speciﬁcation for a
participatory LLM that takes these tensions into account: a brief for what we call the Newsroom
Tooling Alliance (5). Finally, we argue that today’s commercial foundation models are ill-suited to
the needs of modern journalism; and that participatory approaches to LLMs are needed to com-
plement traditional evaluation metrics with the organizational and humanistic desiderata to meet
real-world needs (6).
References
[1] Peter N Amponsah and Atianashie Miracle Atianashie. 2024. Navigating the New Frontier: A Comprehensive Review
of AI in Journalism. Advances in Journalism and Communication 12, 1 (2024), 1–17.
[2] Sherry R Arnstein. 1969. A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of the American Institute of planners 35, 4 (1969),
216–224.
[3] Marianne Aubin Le Quéré, Mor Naaman, and Jenna Fields. 2024. Not Quite Filling the Void: Comparing the Perceptions
of Local Online Groups and Local Media Pages on Facebook. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
8, CSCW1 (2024), 1–22.
[4] Charlie Beckett. 2019. New powers, new responsibilities: A global survey of journalism and artiﬁcial intelligence.
London School of Economics 18 (2019).
[5] Rahul
Bhargava.
[n. d.].
AI-Powered
Content
Audits
for
Local
News.
Medium.
https://generative-ai-newsroom.com/ai-powered-content-audits-for-local-news-0608773996ec
[6] Rahul Bhargava, Elisabeth Hadjis, and Meg Heckman. 2024. A Case Study in an AI-Assisted Content Audit. Compu-
tation and Journalism Symposium (2024).
[7] Abeba Birhane, William Isaac, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Diaz, Madeleine Clare Elish, Iason Gabriel, and Shakir
Mohamed. 2022. Power to the people? Opportunities and challenges for participatory AI. In Proceedings of the 2nd
ACM Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization. 1–8.
[8] Kathy Charmaz. 2015. Grounded theory. Qualitative psychology: A practical guide to research methods 3 (2015), 53–84.
[9] Angèle Christin. 2020. Metrics at Work: Journalism and the Contested Meaning of Algorithms. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 16 ===

16
Tseng et al.
[10] Hannes Cools and Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2024. Uses of generative AI in the newsroom: Mapping journalists’ percep-
tions of perils and possibilities. Journalism Practice (2024), 1–19.
[11] Ned Cooper, Tiﬀanie Horne, Gillian R Hayes, Courtney Heldreth, Michal Lahav, Jess Holbrook, and Lauren Wilcox.
2022. A systematic review and thematic analysis of community-collaborative approaches to computing research. In
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–18.
[12] Eric Corbett, Emily Denton, and Sheena Erete. 2023. Power and public participation in ai. In Proceedings of the 3rd
ACM Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization. 1–13.
[13] Flora Cornish, Nancy Breton, Ulises Moreno-Tabarez, Jenna Delgado, Mohi Rua, Ama de Graft Aikins, and Darrin
Hodgetts. 2023. Participatory action research. Nature Reviews Methods Primers 3, 1 (2023), 34.
[14] Joshua P Darr, Matthew P Hitt, and Johanna L Dunaway. 2018. Newspaper closures polarize voting behavior. Journal
of Communication 68, 6 (2018), 1007–1028.
[15] Fernando Delgado, Stephen Yang, Michael Madaio, and Qian Yang. 2023. The participatory turn in ai design: Theo-
retical foundations and the current state of practice. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Equity and Access in
Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization. 1–23.
[16] Nicola Dell, Vidya Vaidyanathan, Indrani Medhi, Edward Cutrell, and William Thies. 2012. " Yours is better!" partici-
pant response bias in HCI. In Proceedings of the sigchi conference on human factors in computing systems. 1321–1330.
[17] Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2019. Automating the news: How algorithms are rewriting the media. Harvard University Press.
[18] Nicholas Diakopoulos, Hannes Cools, N Helberger, C Li, Ernest Kung, Aimee Rinehart, et al. 2024. Generative AI in
Journalism: The Evolution of Newswork and Ethics in a Generative Information Ecosystem. Technical Report. Associated
Press.
[19] Tomás Dodds, Astrid Vandendaele, Felix M Simon, Natali Helberger, Valeria Resendez, and Wang Ngai Yeung. 2024.
The Impact of Knowledge Silos on Responsible AI Practices in Journalism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01138 (2024).
[20] Marisela Gutierrez Lopez, Colin Porlezza, Glenda Cooper, Stephann Makri, Andrew MacFarlane, and Sondess Mis-
saoui. 2023. A question of design: Strategies for embedding AI-driven tools into journalistic work routines. Digital
Journalism 11, 3 (2023), 484–503.
[21] Maggie Harrison Dupré. 2023.
Sports Illustrated Published Articles by Fake, AI-Generated Writers.
Futurism.
https://futurism.com/sports-illustrated-ai-generated-writers
[22] Carey L Higgins-Dobney. 2021. News work: The impact of corporate-implemented technology on local television
newsroom labor. Journalism Practice 15, 8 (2021), 1054–1071.
[23] Md Naimul Hoque, Ayman A Mahfuz, Mayukha Sridhatri Kindi, and Naeemul Hassan. 2024. Towards Designing a
Question-Answering Chatbot for Online News: Understanding Questions and Perspectives. In Proceedings of the CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.
[24] Bronwyn Jones, Rhianne Jones, and Ewa Luger. 2022. AI ‘Everywhere and Nowhere’: addressing the AI intelligibility
problem in public service journalism. Digital Journalism 10, 10 (2022), 1731–1755.
[25] MARIANNE AUBIN Le Quéré and MAURICE Jakesch. 2022. Trust in AI in Under-resourced Environments: Lessons
from Local Journalism. In CHI’22: Workshop on Trust and Reliance in AI-Human Teams.
[26] Chiara Longoni, Andrey Fradkin, Luca Cian, and Gordon Pennycook. 2022. News from generative artiﬁcial intelli-
gence is believed less. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 97–106.
[27] Wilson Lowrey. 2011. Institutionalism, news organizations and innovation. Journalism studies 12, 1 (2011), 64–79.
[28] Dieuwertje Luitse and Wiebke Denkena. 2021. The great transformer: Examining the role of large language models
in the political economy of AI. Big Data & Society 8, 2 (2021), 20539517211047734.
[29] Jenny Ma, Duy K Nguyen, Pedro Alejandro Perez, and Lydia Chilton. 2025. Scrolly2Reel: Retargeting Graphics for
Social Media Using Narrative Beats. (2025).
[30] Ted Matherly and Brad N Greenwood. 2021. No news is bad news: Political corruption, news deserts, and the decline
of the fourth estate. Academy of Manage-ment Proceedings 1 (2021).
[31] Cecily Mauran. 2024. More news organizations are suing OpenAI for copyright infringement: OpenAI is in its lawsuit
era. Mashable (29 February 2024).
[32] Lynge Asbjørn Møller, Morten Skovsgaard, and Claes de Vreese. 2024. Reinforce, readjust, reclaim: How artiﬁcial
intelligence impacts journalism’s professional claim. Journalism (2024), 14648849241269300.
[33] Michael Muller and Q Vera Liao. 2017. Exploring ai ethics and values through participatory design ﬁctions. Human
Computer Interaction Consortium (2017).
[34] Sachita Nishal and Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2024. Envisioning the applications and implications of generative AI for
news media. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18835 (2024).
[35] Sachita Nishal, Jasmine Sinchai, and Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2024. Understanding Practices around Computational
News Discovery Tools in the Domain of Science Journalism. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction
8, CSCW1 (2024), 1–36.
[36] Matt O’Brien. 2023. ChatGPT-maker OpenAI signs deal with AP to license news stories. Associated Press (July 2023).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 17 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
17
[37] Muck Rack. 2024. State of Journalism 2024. Technical Report. Muck Rack.
[38] Damian Radcliﬀe and Ryan Wallace. 2021. Life at Local Newspapers in a Turbulent Era: Findings from a survey of
more than 300 newsroom employees in the United States. Columbia Journalism Review, Tow Center Report, OCTOBER
7 (2021).
[39] Bill Reader. 2006. Distinctions that matter: Ethical diﬀerences at large and small newspapers. Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly 83, 4 (2006), 851–864.
[40] Liam Reilly. 2025.
Apple is pulling its AI-generated notiﬁcations for news after generating fake headlines.
CNN.
https://www.cnn.com/2025/01/16/media/apple-ai-news-fake-headlines/index.html
[41] Katie Robertson. 2024. 8 Daily Newspapers Sue OpenAI and Microsoft Over A.I.: The suit, which accuses the tech
companies of copyright infringement, adds to the ﬁght over the online data used to power artiﬁcial intelligence. The
New York Times (30 April 2024).
[42] Sayyed Fawad Ali Shah, Breann E Murphy, Teddi A Joyce, and Ben Cunningham. 2024. “I don’t get sick leave”: Small-
market newspaper journalists’ perceptions of the impact of occupational stressors and organizational support on their
mental well-being. Newspaper Research Journal 45, 4 (2024), 472–491.
[43] Felix M Simon. 2024. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the News: How AI Retools, Rationalizes, and Reshapes Journalism and
the Public Arena.
[44] Mona Sloane, Emanuel Moss, Olaitan Awomolo, and Laura Forlano. 2022. Participation is not a design ﬁx for machine
learning. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization.
1–6.
[45] Alem Febri Sonni, Hasdiyanto Haﬁed, Irwanto Irwanto, and Rido Latuheru. 2024. Digital Newsroom Transformation:
A Systematic Review of the Impact of Artiﬁcial Intelligence on Journalistic Practices, News Narratives, and Ethical
Challenges. Journalism and Media 5, 4 (2024), 1554–1570.
[46] Harini Suresh, Emily Tseng, Meg Young, Mary Gray, Emma Pierson, and Karen Levy. 2024. Participation in the age
of foundation models. In The 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 1609–1621.
[47] Financial Times. 2024. Financial Times announces strategic partnership with OpenAI. Financial Times (2024).
[48] Charlotte Tobitt. [n. d.]. ’Millions’ of NYT and NY Daily News stories taken by OpenAI for training data. Press Gazette.
https://pressgazette.co.uk/media_law/millions-of-nyt-and-ny-daily-news-stories-taken-by-openai-for-training-data
[49] Benjamin Toﬀand Nick Mathews. 2024. Is social media killing local news? An examination of engagement and
ownership patterns in US Community news on Facebook. Digital Journalism 12, 9 (2024), 1397–1416.
[50] Benjamin Toﬀand Felix M Simon. 2024. “Or They Could Just Not Use It?”: The Dilemma of AI Disclosure for Audience
Trust in News. The International Journal of Press/Politics (2024), 19401612241308697.
[51] Eray Turkel, Anish Saha, Rhett Carson Owen, Gregory J Martin, and Shoshana Vasserman. 2021. A method for
measuring investigative journalism in local newspapers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, 30
(2021), e2105155118.
[52] Arjen Van Dalen. 2024. Revisiting the algorithms behind the headlines. How journalists respond to professional
competition of generative ai. Journalism Practice (2024), 1–18.
[53] Sitong Wang, Samia Menon, Tao Long, Keren Henderson, Dingzeyu Li, Kevin Crowston, Mark Hansen, Jeﬀrey V
Nickerson, and Lydia B Chilton. 2024. ReelFramer: Human-AI co-creation for news-to-video translation. In Proceedings
of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–20.
[54] David Gray Widder, Meredith Whittaker, and Sarah Myers West. 2024. Why ‘open’AI systems are actually closed, and
why this matters. Nature 635, 8040 (2024), 827–833.
[55] Qing Xiao, Xianzhe Fan, Felix M Simon, Bingbing Zhang, and Motahhare Eslami. 2024. " It Might be Technically
Impressive, But It’s Practically Useless to Us": Practices, Challenges, and Opportunities for Cross-Functional Collab-
oration around AI within the News Industry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12000 (2024).
A
Participant Details
B
Artifact
Our co-design method elicited participants’ reﬂections by ﬁrst presenting an artifact for them to react
to (full description in 3). Our artifact was a PDF depicting a hypothetical recruitment email and one-
pager describing a Newsroom Tooling Alliance. This is the text of that PDF.
Subject: Invitation to share your newsroom’s use and perspective on AI
Dear Newsroom Leader,
The news industry is undergoing a period of rapid disruption with artiﬁcial intelligence, where
large technologycompanies have scraped and monetized newsrooms’ intellectual property at scale.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 18 ===

18
Tseng et al.
Organization
Participant IDs
Newspaper group
P03, P14, P16
National newspaper
P19
Regional newspaper
P01, P15
Local newspaper
P02, P05
News wire
P06, P12a, P12b
Digital-ﬁrst media group
P09
Digital ﬁrst, nonproﬁt
P04, P10, P17, P18
Public radio
P07
Locally owned television station
P08
Journalism collaboration organizations
P11, P13
Table 1. Participants by organization type. Journalism collaboration organizations included groups that co-
ordinate events and provide journalists with resources and support to innovate.
Participant Roles
Participant IDs
Owner
P09, P12a
Executive director
P04
Chief product/innovation oﬃcer
P01, P11
Vice president news
P14, P16
Editor
P02, P03, P18, P19
Web editor
P05, P12b
Reporter
P06, P17
Managing editor
P07, P10
Product director, manager
P08, P13, P15
Table 2. Participants by current roles at their organizations.
Legal challenges to this new reality are unfolding at a glacial pace. The Newsroom Tooling Alliance
(NTA) has begun an ambitious eﬀort to lay the groundwork to create a journalist-controlled large
language model.
We are a team of researchers that is interested in learning more from you about how your
newsroom is seeing this digital disruption and how you might play an active role in controlling
your own data and outcomes when using artiﬁcial intelligence.
Do you have 45-minutes in the next two weeks to discuss this initiative? The call will be recorded
for research purposes.
Sincerely, XYZ
The Newsroom Tooling Alliance (NTA)
Executive summary The Newsroom Tooling Alliance is a coalition of news organizations
that has entered into an agreement for the purpose of creating and sustaining a news industry-
controlled large language model (LLM). Each organization in the Alliance has contributed their
dataset to the archive, maintaining their copyright, under a data-use agreement. A staﬀof data
scientists use these datasets to build and maintain a state-of-the-art large language model and cus-
tom tooling, and provide access to each participating news organization, which is billed for usage
at cost. Our LLM-powered tooling ensures that journalists are at the center of deciding how this
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 19 ===

“Ownership, Not Just Happy Talk”: Co-Designing a Participatory Large Language Model for Journalism
19
technology will be used, and that their intellectual property is protected. Tools built on our reposi-
tory and model support reporting, attribution, archival search, fact-checking, and more. Long term,
the Alliance will also explore other revenue models, such as licensing access to newsroom data,
and support legal fees to cases challenging large tech companies who have appropriated this data
through unlicensed scraping.
Terms of participation Participation includes data contribution, member access to tooling,
and representation on joint governance boards and working groups. To participate in the Alliance,
organizations sign a data-sharing agreement and separate data-use agreement that supports the
creation of our shared LLM and tooling.
• NTA has foundation funding to support the costs associated with data intake; there is no
cost to contribute data.
• Use of the LLM will be billed at cost for upload and download time, without the additional
charges billed by companies like ChatGPT to use its tooling.
• Revenues to the NTA will go toward the development and maintenance of newsroom-centered
tooling and legal fees to protect members’ IP against unlicensed uses of their work.
• A steering committee composed of representatives from each member organization will ex-
plore other revenue streams long-term.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


=== PAGE 20 ===

This figure "acm-jdslogo.png" is available in "png"
 format from:
http://arxiv.org/ps/2501.17299v1
